The (Dogmatic) Analytic Philosophy Primer 

© Bernard Molyneux 2010, 2014

Comments are welcome. Please alert me to mistakes. Please do not distribute. Foreword

For Philosophers

This primer is meant to get students rapidly accustomed to thinking in the style that analytic philosophy demands. Emphasis has been placed on developing the students grasp of key philosophical concepts, including the concepts of normativity and truth, possibility and necessity, existence, belief and knowledge. The analyses of these basic concepts are themselves the subject of extensive debate in philosophy, and so, in the normal course of events, the student is introduced to the concepts via the various debates. However, this can be a confusing approach for many students, since they require a good grounding in these concepts in order to master the skill set required in analytic philosophy, yet their attempts to acquire the concepts are constantly undermined by the controversy. The result can often be confusion, of the wrong sort, about how to proceed in the discipline. 

To remedy this, this primer avoids all controversy. A single, unquestioning path is taken through the morass of philosophical concepts, settling what many philosophers will take to be contentious questions in an authoritative and dogmatic (and to many, wrongheaded) style. Though the disadvantage of this approach is that it may give the student the false impression that these matters are resolved beyond dispute, that problem is easily remedied either by reading this foreword or through future study. The advantages of this approach, however, are several, for it permits the beginning student to acquire a mastery of several key philosophical concepts with relative speed, and in a manner that resembles the manner of instruction found in nearly all other disciplines. The path selected is intended to be “orthodox enough” to permit the student to (a) proceed with confidence in areas where the concepts are presupposed and (b) to have a starting point in areas where the concepts themselves are subjected to scrutiny. Such starting points should also help the student to appreciate the importance of the philosophical issue in question. For instance, though there are many problems with the view that propositions are states of affairs, the beginning student has a hard time seeing why she should care. A student that has, on the other hand, been dogmatically introduced to the idea, and has used it to clarify many issues and do a lot of work, should be reluctant to abandon it. Such a student is invested in the debate at the outset, thanks to being exposed to (useful) dogma prior to encountering it. 

The primer is not meant to be a historical primer. Nor is it meant to be an exhaustive primer. It is intended to furnish the student with those concepts that seem, to the author, to be dominant in contemporary research in analytic philosophy, and to do so quickly. The concepts were selected based on their general utility, their centrality, and their tendency to form an interlocking group each of which reinforces understanding of the others. 

For Students

The primer is based on the pedagogical method of “programmed learning”, a learning paradigm that emphasizes constant reaction on the part of the student. The student must always be engaged, providing frequent responses to the text, and never passively reading for any extended period. The method involves constantly asking the student to perform tasks that test understanding before proceeding. Accordingly, the text is broken into frames, where most frames end with a task that the student must complete. For fastest and best results, it is strongly recommended that the student attempt each exercise before continuing. Chapter 1 - Sentences and Propositions



The poet T.S. Eliot wrote

Words strain, 
Crack and sometimes break, under the burden, 
Under the tension, slip, slide, perish, 
Decay with imprecision, will not stay in place, 
Will not stay still. Shrieking voices
Scolding, mocking, or merely chattering,
Always assail them. 
—Burnt Norton, 1935 

You may have had the experience of discussing an issue with someone whose words would not stay in place. They seem to be able to slip every argument because they subtly change the meanings of the words they are using. 

In order to be a strong philosopher, or a strong debater, you need to be able to understand how we use language to talk about the world, and how words can change their meanings. 



You might have heard riddles like this one before;

How many ‘i’s does ‘a crocodile’ have?

If you ask someone this verbally, out loud, the answer you will probably receive is “two” even though the correct answer is “one”. This riddle is childish, but it illustrates the importance of not confusing the language itself with the things that the language is meant to express. When we get confused between a representation and the thing it represents, we make what philosophers call a use-mention error.

In this case, the riddle relies on the confusion between the thing a crocodile and the words ‘a crocodile’. 

We use the phrase "use-mention error" because this problem originally arose with linguistic representations, where there seemed to be a clear difference between using a word yourself, and mentioning it as a term that was used or might be used. 

For example, suppose that in some community "frekking" is regarded as a curse-word that is impolite. At the local school there is a rule that says "No child may use the word "frekking"." Suppose a child Sam uses the word "frekking" and another child Jamie  reports to the supervising adult that "Sam said "frekking"!". Did Jamie break the rule in reporting it? Strictly speaking, no. The rule said that no child may use the word "frekking". But Jamie wasn't using it. She was reporting its use. This counts merely as mentioning it. 

The following two questions...

How many letters are in my mailbox right now?

and 

How many letters are in ‘my mailbox right now’?

...are different questions even though they sound the same. And they both sound the same as: 

How many letters are in ‘my mailbox' right now?

The first question is about my mailbox and how many pieces of mail are in it. The second and third are about the number of characters in the words I uttered. You probably don't know the answer to the first question. But you can count out the answers to the second and third. 

Ducks are birds. ‘Ducks’, on the other hand, is a word with 5 letters. Ducks are things that swim in ponds. But ‘Ducks’ is a linguistic object, part of the English language. 

There is a similar distinction to be made between sentences and propositions. 

A sentence is a meaningful, grammatical sequence of words in a language. 

Proceed to the next frame. 



A sentence is what kind of sequence of words?

Answer the question before proceeding to the next frame. 

A sentence is a meaningful, grammatical sequence of words in a language.

Is the following a sentence?

Aching yesterday over through in before see dog the. 


No. That is not grammatical. 

Simple sentences come in three principal types:

Declarative sentences either say that something is so or say that it isn’t so. 

e.g. “I shrank the kids” is a declarative sentence because it says that something is so; i.e. it says that the kids were shrunk by me. 

Is the following a declarative sentence? 

“Shooting crooks makes Harry's day.”

?


That is a declarative sentence because it says that something (about Harry) is so. 

What about this one?

“You’re going to need a bigger boat.”

?


That also is a declarative sentence because it says that something is so. In this case it says that the hearer is going to need a bigger boat. 

What about this one?

“Go to sleep!”

?


That is not a declarative sentence because it does not say that something is so. It is of the second kind of simple sentence. It is an imperative sentence.

Imperative sentences are used to issue commands.

E.g. “Go jump off a bridge!” is an imperative sentence. 

The third kind of sentence is the interrogative sentence, which is used to ask a question. 

e.g. “What time is it?” is an interrogative sentence. 

What kind of sentence is this:

“Who are you?”


That is an interrogative sentence. it is used to ask a question. 

What about this - 

“It is very windy today”


That is a declarative sentence. One more...

“Tell it to the hand!”


That one was an imperative. It was used to issue a command. 

Imperative sentences don’t play much of a role in discussion and debate. Interrogatives and declaratives are much more important. In this primer, declarative sentences will be by far the most important kind of sentence. 

We use declarative sentences to express propositions. Propositions are states of affairs. 

A true proposition is an actual state of affairs. A false proposition is a non-actual state of affairs.

Go to the next frame. 


What is a true proposition? 


A true proposition is an actual state of affairs. 

What is a false proposition? 


A false proposition is a non-actual state of affairs. 

What is the relation between declarative sentences and propositions? 

We use declarative sentences to express propositions. 

To understand the difference between declarative sentences and propositions it is useful to look at pairs of declarative sentences which express the same proposition.

“I bought the camera” and “The camera was bought by me” are different declarative sentences, but they express the same proposition. They are different ways of describing the same state of affairs. 

“Schnee ist weiss” is the German expression for “snow is white”. 

Are they the same sentence? 

No. A sentence is a meaningful, grammatical sequence of words in a language, and these two sequences are not the same grammatical sequence of words in a language. Therefore they are not the same sentence. 

Does “Schnee ist weiss” express the same proposition as “snow is white”?

The two sentences express the same proposition. They express that state of affairs which holds if snow has a certain color, and that color is the color white.  

What about these two? Are they the same sentence? do they express the same proposition? 

“John is an unmarried man” 

“John is a bachelor” 

They are not the same sentence because they are not the same sequence of words, but they do express the same proposition. They each say of John that he is an unmarried male human. 

The fact that different sentences can express the same proposition shows that propositions and declarative sentences are not the same thing. There are many different sentences which can be used to express a given proposition. 

How do the following two sentences...

“Tom kicked the dog”

and

“The dog was kicked by Tom”

demonstrate the difference between declarative sentences and propositions?


They are different sentences which express the same proposition. They therefore show that propositions and declarative sentences are not the same. 

There is usually more than one sentence which can be used to express a given proposition. Sometimes, there is more than one proposition that a given sentence expresses. 

The English sentence...

“Swerving suddenly, he crashed right into the bank” 

...can be used to express at least two propositions depending on whether ‘bank’ refers to a river bank or a financial institution. 

The following sentence can be used to express more than one proposition. Can you figure out which propositions it expresses? 

“Flying planes can be dangerous.”

?

The first proposition that the sentence might be used to express is about the activity of flying planes. The proposition is true if that is a dangerous activity. The second proposition the sentence might be used to express concerns those flying things we call planes; it says of them that they are dangerous. 

When a sentence can be used to express more than one proposition we say that it is ambiguous. 

Here is a tough one...

“The French bottle smells.”

This sentence is ambiguous. It can be used to express two distinct propositions. What are they?


Of course, the sentence could be used to express that proposition which is true if the bottle from France is a smelly bottle. But it can also be used to say of the French that they engage in the practice of bottling smells. 

Sentences are ambiguous if they pick out more than one proposition. Propositions are not the kinds of things that are ambiguous. 

To say that a proposition is ambiguous is to make a category error. Shoes are not the kinds of things that can be ambiguous. Neither are cows, trucks, boats or civil rights (though, maybe, expressions of civil rights can be ambiguous). Propositions are not the kinds of things that can be ambiguous either. But sentences are the kinds of things that can be ambiguous. 

To understand better what a category error is, imagine you are asked the following question: 

"Is a growl red? If not, what color is it?" 

The question attempts to force you to choose one value from a list of possible color values. If you deny that the grown is red, you are invited to say that it is yellow, or blue, or green. But growls do not have color. 

"Ah! So the growl is transparent, like glass!" 

No. That too is a category error. Growls are not the kinds of things that have visual properties at all. Not only are they not colored, they are not transparent like glass either. 

Make a category error out of the following words; shiny tastes some are

It’s easy; the category error is the assertion “Some tastes are shiny”

Why is it a category error? 

It is a category error because tastes are not the kinds of things which can be shiny or dull. 

We make a category error when we give something a value along a certain dimension of variance, where in fact the thing in question cannot take any value along that dimension. 

Why is the following assertion a category error?

“That dog is divisible by 5”


It is a category error because ‘divisible by 5’ applies to numbers, not dogs. Dogs are not divisible by 5, nor by any other number. And they are not prime either. 

Why is the following assertion a category error? 

“This number smells good.”

It is a category error because numbers are not the kinds of things which smell good (though representations of numbers made of chocolate can smell good.)

Make an educated guess: Are propositions the kinds of things that can be grammatical?

No. Propositions are not the kinds of things that can be grammatical. Sentences are the kinds of things that can be grammatical. 

Make an educated guess: Strictly speaking, are propositions the kinds of things that can be said, or written down?


Strictly speaking, propositions are not the kinds of things which can be said or written down. But propositions can be expressed, in spoken or written form, using sentences. Nevertheless it is always the sentence that you write down; never the proposition. 

The important thing to remember is that propositions are what sentences express; they are not the sentences themselves. 

What kinds of things are ambiguous; sentences or propositions? 

Sentences. Propositions are not the kinds of things which can be ambiguous. Sentences are ambiguous when they can be used to express more than one proposition. 

Consider the following sentence: 

"Get your coat!"

Is it true or false? 

Neither. It is neither true nor false. It is an imperative sentence, and imperative sentences are not the kinds of things that can be true or false. 

It would be a c_______ e____ to say that an imperative sentence is true.It would be a category error to say that an imperative sentence is true. Imperative sentences are not the kinds of sentences that can be true or false. 

Which kinds of sentences can be true or false? Declarative sentences are the kind of sentences that can be either true or false. That is because they express _____________. 

Propositions. 

A common form of ambiguity in English arises when we cannot tell how the clauses in a sentence are supposed to be grouped. 

e.g. At a restaurant the menu says “All entrees come with fries and soup or drink”

What propositions can this sentence be used to express? 

The sentence can be used to express two propositions;

1. That all entrees come with fries, and that they also come either with soup or with a drink. 

2. That each entree comes with either fries plus soup or it comes with a drink. 

If we are willing to write in an artificial way, we can disambiguate these two interpretations by using parentheses. “All entrees come with fries and (soup or drink)” expresses (1) above, whereas “All entrees come with (fries and soup) or drink” expresses the second. 

Put parentheses on the sentence below, to indicate three propositions it can be used to pick out. 

Take 15 and drive east and then go north or take route 22. 

Take 15 and drive east and then (go north or take route 22). 

(Take 15 and drive east and then go north) or take route 22. 

Take 15 and ((drive east and then go north) or take route 22.) 

Put parentheses in the sentence below, to indicate two propositions it can be used to pick out. 

Send me your paper as an attachment and write your name in the message or put it in my mailbox. 

(Send me your paper as an attachment and write your name in the message) or put it in my mailbox. 

Send me your paper as an attachment and (write your name in the message or put it in my mailbox.)

Put parentheses on the sentence below to indicate all the propositions it can be used to pick out. You will have to use more than one set of parentheses. 

All entrees come with fries or rice and soup or salad. 

All entrees come with (fries or rice) and (soup or salad).
	
I.e. the options for each entree are 1. fries and soup, 2. fries and salad, 3. rice and soup, 4. rice and salad. 

All entrees come with fries or (rice and (soup or salad)).
	
I.e. the options are 1. fries, 2. rice and soup, 3. rice and salad. 

All entrees come with ((fries or rice) and soup) or salad.   
	
I.e. the options are 1. Fries and soup, 2. Rice and soup, 3. Salad. 

All entrees come with fries or (rice and soup) or salad. 
	
I.e. the options are 1. Fries, 2. Rice and soup 3. Salad. 

Put parentheses on the following sentence to indicate two different propositions it can be used to pick out. 

He will start spending straight away or hide the cash and make like a tree.  

He will (start spending straight away or hide the cash) and make like a tree.  

On this first interpretation, whether he starts spending straight away or hides the cash, he will definitely make like a tree. 

He will start spending straight away or (hide the cash and make like a tree.) 

This second interpretation, on the other hand, allows for the possibility that he will not make like a tree at all. But if he does, it will be in the context of having also hidden the cash. 

When interpreting something one ought to give it the reading which makes the most sense. This is one way in which we apply the Principle of Charity. 

It is easy to see what the principle of charity is by looking at what is not. Sometimes in order to create humor people deliberately ignore the principle of charity, interpreting words in the most humorous way, not the way in which they were intended. Willful misinterpretation is also a tactic used by politicians and journalists when they want to distort another person’s point of view in order to make it easier to attack. 

To build a caricature of a person’s position in order to destroy it is known as the fallacy of straw man. The fallacy can be thought of as a violation of the principle of charity. 

There are two interpretations of the following sentence;

“People who torture animals should be imprisoned.”

What are they? (hint - place commas before ‘who’ and after ‘animals’) 

The less obvious interpretation implies that people in general torture animals. This interpretation is easier to see if you insert commas or dashes in certain places...

“People—who torture animals—should be imprisoned. 

This suggests that all people torture animals; that it is a pervasive feature of people in general. 

The second, more natural, interpretation says only that the people who ought to be imprisoned are the people who torture animals; it does not say whether that group comprises people in general. 

Which of these interpretations best serves the principle of charity? I.e. which is the more reasonable one?

The second interpretation—that the people who torture animals are the people who ought to be imprisoned—is the most charitable interpretation because it is the least likely to be false. The other interpretation has the author hinting that people in general torture animals, but that is a dubious claim. 

Deciding which of two interpretations is more charitable is more an art than a science. Generally, you go for the interpretation that seems more reasonable. I.e. you try to find the best balance of:  

The one that seems least likely to be false. 
The one that least makes the author seem like an idiot or ignoramus. 
The one that least makes the author seem immoral or extremist. 

There are two interpretations of the following sentence;

“Dissidents who spread anti-government materials should be imprisoned.”

What are they? (hint - place commas before ‘who’ and after ‘materials’) 

The first interpretation says that the dissidents who ought to be imprisoned are the ones who spread anti-government materials.

The second interpretation says that all dissidents should be imprisoned, whether or not they spread anti-government materials. 

The second interpretation is easier to see if you insert commas or dashes in certain places, or put the words "as it happens" after "who"... Here are those additions in bold. 

“Dissidents—who (as it happens) spread anti-government materials—should be imprisoned."

This says that dissidents in general ought to be imprisoned. The fact that dissidents spread anti-government materials is added as incidental information. 

Which of these interpretations best serves the principle of charity? (hint- it is the one that asks the least.) 

The first interpretation is the most charitable because it asks the least. The second interpretation asks that all dissidents be imprisoned not some specific subgroup.

Selecting the most charitable interpretation is more an art than a science, but selecting the more reasonable of two interpretations is generally the way to go (even if both are unreasonable.) 
Chapter 2 - Truth


“Gimme the truth, the truth you sucker”
	- Rage Against the Machine

A proposition can be true or false, depending upon the information it contains. These are its possible truth values.

We also say that sentences are true or false. A sentence is true if it picks out a true proposition. A sentence is false if it picks out a false proposition. If a sentence does not pick out a proposition at all, then it is neither true nor false. 


Why would a sentence fail to pick out a proposition? 

Usually because the sentence does not provide enough information. For example, devoid of context, the sentence 

“He hit him.”

does not express a proposition. There is no way to determine who hit whom. 

Is the following sentence true or false or neither? 

“He went to the cinema.”

?

It is neither because without some way of determining who ‘he’ is. Out of context, the sentence does not express a proposition. 

Is the following sentence true or false or neither? 

“It is cold here.”


It is neither, because there is no way of determining from the information available where ‘here’ is. However, if the sentence 

“It is cold here.” 

...were uttered at the MacDonald’s restaurant opposite the train station in New Brunswick then we would know where ‘here’ was. 

Often, for a sentence to express a proposition it needs to be supplemented with contextual information: information about the speaker and her surroundings, and maybe information about the topic of conversation. 

The sentence “Bill Clinton is the President” is true if uttered in 1995, false if uttered in 2002. Does that mean that it expresses a proposition which is both true and false, or that it expresses a proposition that which is neither true nor false? Or does it mean something else? 

The answer is something else. It means that the sentence picks out a different proposition depending upon the context in which it is uttered. 

“Bill Clinton is the President”, uttered in 1995, picks out the proposition expressed by the more precise sentence "Bill Clinton was the President in 1995". This proposition is true.  

“Bill Clinton is the President”, uttered in 2002, picks out the proposition expressed by "Bill Clinton was the President in 2002". This proposition is false.  

What proposition would the sentence “Napoleon Bonaparte is the current Emperor of France.” pick out if uttered in 1805? 

It would pick out the proposition also expressed by the sentence "Napoleon Bonaparte is (or was) the Emperor of France in 1805".

What proposition would the sentence “It was -20 degrees celsius here at 12.05 on the 15th of January 2004” pick out if it were uttered in New York City? 

It would pick out the proposition also expressed by the sentence "It was -20 degrees celsius in New York City at 12.05 on the 15th of January 2004."

What proposition does the sentence “Yesterday Bob went to the cleaners on George St, New Brunswick” pick out if uttered on 15th January 2004 by Bob?


It picks out the same proposition that is also expressed by the sentence "On 14th January 2004 Bob went to the cleaners on George St, New Brunswick." 

If a sentence fails to pick out a proposition, is the sentence true or false? 

It is neither true nor false. It is not the kind of thing that could be. 
Most logicians believe that every proposition is either true or false. This is called the principle of bivalence because it states that there are only two (bi) truth values (valence). 

It is also believed that no proposition is both true and false. This is the principle of non-contradiction. 


What are the two truth values? 

The two truth values are true and false. 

Review - A sentence is true if what?

A sentence is true if it picks out a true proposition. 

Review - A sentence is false if what? 

A sentence is false if it picks out a false proposition. 

What does the principle of bivalence state?

The principle of bivalence states that all propositions are either true or false; there is no third value.  

++Trick question alert++ 

According to the principle of bivalence, does every sentence have to be either true or false? 

Not according to the principle of bivalence as we presented it here. According to that principle, only propositions have to be true or false. 

Indeed, some sentences, e.g. commands and questions, are obviously not either true or false. 

What does the principle of non-contradiction state?

The principle of non-contradiction states that no proposition is both true and false. 


Assume that the following sentences (i) - (iii) all express propositions. 

	(i) Abortion is wrong.
	(ii) Terminator 3 is a terrible movie. 
	(iii) This sentence is false. 

According to the principle of bivalence, do the propositions expressed by them have to be either true or false?


Yes. according to the principle of bivalence every proposition has to be either true or false. If those sentences express propositions at all, then according to the principle of bivalence the propositions they express have to be true or false. 

The last of these sentences is very troublesome for the principle of bivalence, for it seems that the proposition it expresses cannot be either true or false. It is a paradox. Accordingly, many people believe that it cannot express a proposition at all. 

The propositions expressed by the first two of these sentences are evaluative rather than factual.
	
Factual propositions are judgements of fact; they attempt to describe the world. 
	e.g. “Beijing is in China” expresses a factual proposition. 
Evaluative propositions aim to judge the value of things in various regards. 
	e.g. “Figure skating is great!” expresses an evaluative proposition. 

Is the following factual or evaluative?

“Cats cough up furballs”

That statement is factual. It describes the way the world is. 

What is the difference between sentences that express factual propositions and those that express evaluative propositions? 

Factual propositions attempt to describe the world, whereas evaluative propositions attempt to ascribe value. 

Does the following express a factual or an evaluative proposition?

“Unicorns are actually brown, not white.”


That too expresses a factual proposition - though false - because it attempts to describe the way the world is, even though it fails to do so correctly. 

What about this?

“Murder is wrong.”


The proposition expressed by that sentence is evaluative as it ascribes a moral value to the act of murder. 

What about this one? 

“Stealing from major record labels is OK.”

That statement is also evaluative as it ascribes a moral value to the act of stealing from major record labels. 

What about this one?

“’The Good, the Bad and the Ugly’ was a great film. “

The proposition expressed is evaluative as it ascribes an aesthetic value to a film. 

People sometimes say that factual propositions are not true or false. They are ‘true for me’ or ‘true for you’. 

But this is a mistake. The whole point of describing a proposition as ‘factual’ is to say that there is some fact of the matter. A factual proposition is one that you can be right or wrong about. 

The following proposition

“Paris is in France”

Is either right or wrong; true or false. Paris is either in France or it is not. People who believe that proposition are either wrong or right. Strictly speaking, propositions are either true or false, not “true for me” “false for you” etc.

The reason talk of "true for me" and "true for you" is regarded as bad is because it is confusing. If you say that “Paris is in Germany” is “true for you” I don’t know what exactly you are meaning to say. 

(i) Perhaps you just mean that you believe it. In that case, I can agree with you that you believe that Paris is in Germany. But that does not stop me from disagreeing that Paris is in Germany. 
(ii) Perhaps you mean that the facts vary from person to person. That if you went to Paris, you would go to Germany, but if I went to Paris, then I would go to France. But in that case what you are saying is absurd.  “Paris is in France” is not just “true for me”. it is true for everyone. It is true period. 

Because this is such a confusing way to talk, it is avoided in analytic philosophy. 

Strictly speaking, Can factual propositions be ‘true for me’ or ‘true for you’? 

Strictly speaking, no they can’t. Factual propositions are determined by the way the world is; they don’t change their truth values from person to person. 

If someone says ““Paris is in France” is true for me” what might they mean? 

They probably mean that they believe that Paris is in France. But they are implying that they have a right to their own truth, and that you may not disagree. 

If someone says “It is true for me that Manchester City won the Premiership, even if it isn’t true for you.” what do they mean? 

They probably mean that they believe that Manchester City won the Premiership, and they are not allowing it to be open for discussion. 


 

What about evaluative propositions?

Surely the proposition “Bacon tastes good” is relative to the speaker. That proposition is true for some people and false for others. 

However, this too is a loose way to talk. The proposition expressed by the sentence “Bacon tastes good” is “Bacon tastes good to me (the speaker).” This proposition is either true or false, not true for me, false for you etc. 

We can easily translate a so-called relative truth into an absolute truth by bringing the relative part into the sentence. e.g. 

““Bacon tastes good” is true for John” 

is a loose way to talk. 

but

““Bacon tastes good to John” is true”

 is a precise way to talk because we are back to having simple “is true” and “is false” not “is true for me” and “is false for me”. 

We simply move the relative component “for John” into the quotes. 

Translate the following into an absolute truth. 

“’The Terminator’ was a great movie” is true for me. 

“For me, ’The Terminator’ was a great movie” is true. 

Translate the following into an absolute truth. 

“Sean Penn is the most talented actor working these days “ is true for Tom. 

“For Tom, Sean Penn is the most talented actor working these days “ is true. 

Again...

“Abortion is wrong” is true for me. 

“To me, Abortion is wrong” is true.  Whether we use ‘to’ of ‘for’ is just a matter of which sounds better. 

The point is that truth is what does not vary from person to person. There is only one truth. Therefore ‘true for me’ strictly speaking, does not make any sense. 

If we were speaking strictly, how would we rephrase the following claim? 

“Euthanasia is sometimes permissible” is true for me. 

“For me, Euthanasia is sometimes permissible” is true.

How about this...

“Yellow is the most attractive color” is true for me. 

“To me, Yellow is the most attractive color” is true. 

People use the ‘<Proposition P> is true for me’ construction for several pragmatic reasons. They may mean;

	- I believe that P.
	- In my opinion, P.
	- P, but I don’t want to argue the point. 
	- The way I see it, P.

It may also be the case that teachers and group leaders use the device ‘true for me’ in order to suppress negative criticism of the views of others in the group, and therefore allow ideas to flourish in an environment in which people can express their views without being told “No that’s false.”
 
This is a good device for promoting good-natured discussion. But it is just a device. Still - as a matter of fact - things are either true or false, not true for me, false for you etc. 

Give some examples of practical reasons to use the ‘P is true for me’ device. 

People use that device to say that they believe that P, that P is only their opinion, that they don’t want to argue the point, that they interpret P as true and they use it as a device for facilitating free non-hostile discussion.

Is saying that something is ‘true for you’ a correct way of speaking? 

No. It is not a technically correct way of speaking.  It is merely a device for making conversation less confrontational. 

Sometimes we are told that we must not impugn the views of other groups by saying that they are simply wrong, as this is not politically correct. 

For example, we prefer to say that the beliefs of other religious groups are ‘true for them’ even if they are not ‘true for us’. 

This is very polite, but it is technically incorrect. Christians do not believe that their beliefs are true “for them”. They believe that their beliefs are true period. They believe that adherents of other religions are wrong. They believe that other religions contain falsehoods. Similarly, the Muslims, Jews and Hindus believe that they are right and that Christianity contains falsehoods. 

So to say...

““Christ was the Son of God” is true for Christians” 

is to say something that nobody believes. The Christians don’t think it is merely true for them, they think it is true for everyone. It is true period. And the Muslims, Jews, Hindus and Atheists don’t believe it is true for Christians, since they don’t think it is true for anyone. They think it is false period. Which would mean it is false for Christians too, even though they mistakenly believe it. 

Who believes the following proposition;

“Mohammed was the greatest prophet” is true for Muslims.”

?

Nobody. Muslims believe that the sentence in quotes is true period, not merely “true for Muslims”. And non-Muslims usually think that it is false period. Nobody believes that it is true only for Muslims. 

Which of the following are not technically correct ways of speaking? 

1. “Christ was the Son of God” is true.
2. “Christ was the Son of God” is false.
3. “Christians believe that Christ was the Son of God” is true.
4. “Christians believe that Christ was the Son of God” is false.
5. “Christ was the Son of God” is true for Christians.
6. “Christ was the Son of God” is false for Christians.

Though it is impossible that 1 and 2 both be true, and though 4 is clearly false (it is true, not false, that Christians believe Christ was the son of God) only 5 and 6 are incorrect ways of speaking. Propositions are not true or false for particular groups, they are true and false period. 

Maybe people mean by ‘true for me’ that it is true under the interpretation that they give it. 

e.g. ‘Josef Stalin was a lunatic’ might be true for me but false for you because we each have different ideas of what constitutes a ‘lunatic’. 

In this case we say that the sentence ‘Josef Stalin is a lunatic’ is ambiguous. 

An ambiguous sentence picks out different propositions depending upon the interpretation. 

However those propositions are either true or false, and never both - this is what the principles of bivalence and non-contradiction say.  

The sentence “Josef Stalin was a lunatic” may express one proposition for one person, another proposition for another. But the propositions themselves are each either true or false, and no proposition is both. 

Here is another example of an occasion when people say that something is ‘true for them’: 

“For me, it is true that the glass is half full, but for you it is not true. You see it as half empty.” 

What does this mean? Is “the glass is half empty” true for me but not for you?

The best thing to do at this point is determine what the people who are making the claims mean by the terms ‘full’ and ‘empty’. 

In most cases, people would agree that - whatever full and empty might otherwise mean - an object is full to the degree that it is not empty, and vice versa. 
So, according to this definition, if the glass is half full, then it is also half empty, and vice versa. 

Though the two viewpoints seem to differ - in emphasis, outlook, connotations etc - they essentially have the same content. A person who says “the glass is half full” is saying the same thing that a person who says “the glass is half empty” is saying. 

When two sentences have the same content they are saying the same thing in different ways. 

Review - What, in terms of propositions, is a more technical way of saying that two sentences are saying the same thing in different ways? 


The two sentences pick out the same proposition. 

When two sentences pick out the same proposition we say that they are equivalent. 

Often, people who seem to be disagreeing are saying the same thing in different words. 

A trivial example;
“I think we should put the butter on a shelf above the milk.”
“I disagree. I think that we should put the milk on a shelf below the butter.”

These statements are actually equivalent. The disputants are not really disagreeing about anything except the form of words being used. 
	

Problems can be solved and disputes resolved by recognizing equivalent statements. 

Problems can also be solved sometimes by multiplying the number of equivalent statements; i.e. by saying the same thing in as many different ways as possible. 

e.g. Solving the area of a right-angled triangle. 
	- a tough problem if you describe a right-angled triangle as a bounded plane figure with three sides and one right angle. 
	- an easy problem if you describe a triangle as a rectangle cut in half from corner to corner. 

Two statements are equivalent when they are true and false in all the same circumstances. 

Chapter 3 - Existence



Consider the following sentence: 

“There are lots of Pixies in Romania.” 

This sentence is straightforwardly false because there are no pixies in Romania. 

But what about this sentence?

“Pixies are much smaller than humans.” 

This appears, intuitively, to be true. If you know what pixies are then you have to know that they are smaller than humans. 

However, strictly speaking, the sentence above is false. Pixies are not much smaller than humans because pixies are not anything. There are no such things as pixies. Consider the following: 

“Sherlock Holmes was a famous detective who lived on Baker Street, London, during Victorian times.” 

It is tempting to say that the above sentence is true because the famous fictional character Sherlock Holmes is indeed famous for living on Baker St. Hence this would seem like the correct answer to a quiz question that asked “Who was Sherlock Holmes?”

However, it cannot be true. For the following is true: 

“No-one by the name of Sherlock Holmes ever lived on Baker Street, London.” 

If you check the records in London you will find that there was never a person by that name who lived at that (real) place. 

But if no-one by the name of Holmes lived on Baker Street, then it cannot be true that Holmes lived on Baker Street. 

It is better to say, when speaking strictly:

 “Conan Doyle’s novels expressed propositions concerning a man called Sherlock Holmes who lived on Baker St.” 

and not: 

“Sherlock Holmes lived on Baker St.” 

Does the following sentence express a true proposition? 

“Gnomes live at the bottom of my garden.”

That does not express a true proposition; it expresses a false proposition because gnomes do not exist. 

Does the following express a true proposition? 

“Gnomes eat lettuce leaves.”
?

That does not express a true proposition; it expresses a false proposition because gnomes do not exist. 

Does the following sentence express a true proposition? 

“Gnomes make cheese better than the people of Wisconsin.”

That does not express a true proposition; it expresses a false proposition because gnomes do not exist. 

Does the following express a true proposition? 

“Gnomes are small.”

?

That does not express a true proposition; it expresses a false proposition because gnomes do not exist.  

Gnomes - if they existed, would be little people. but that does not mean that they do exist, and, since they don’t, they can’t be little or big. 

Does the following sentence express a true proposition? 

“Unicorns have one horn.”

?

That does not express a true proposition; it expresses a false proposition because unicorns do not exist. 

Does the following express a true proposition? 

“Zeus was a Greek God who lived on Mount Olympus”

?

That does not express a true proposition; it expresses a false proposition because Zeus does not exist.  

It may be true that if Zeus had been real then he would have been a Greek God who lived on Olympus, but in actual fact there were no Greek Gods that lived on Olympus. 

But if Zeus does not exist, does that mean that all propositions about him are false? 

What about...

“Zeus does not exist.”

Does that sentence express a false proposition, because it does not pick out an existing thing? 


This puzzle dates back to the Greeks. If Zeus does not exist then nothing is true of Zeus. it is not true that he is tall, and it is not true that he is short. He is neither fat nor thin. He does not live on Mount Olympus, neither does he live anywhere else. But if nothing is true of Zeus then not existing is not true of Zeus either. The sentence 

“Zeus does not exist”

Therefore expresses a false proposition. 

But if it's false to say that Zeus does not exist, then doesn't that mean that Zeus exists after all? Here’s a related problem. If any word referred to Zeus, then Zeus would be referred to. But in that case Zeus would have a property - of being referred to. But since Zeus does not exist, he cannot have any properties. Hence he cannot have the property of being referred to. Hence we proved that no word refers to Zeus. Let us call this piece of reasoning 'Argument 1'. 

But in that case, the word “Zeus” doesn’t refer to Zeus. Which means that argument 1 is not about Zeus. Hence we have not proved that no word refers to Zeus, since argument 1 does not concern him. 

The key to all this is to recognize that existence is not a property. The philosopher Immanuel Kant is most famous for making this observation. 

Properties are the kinds of things that some objects have and others do not, but existence is not the kind of thing that some objects have and others do not. Existence is true of everything that exists. Nothing exists that does not exist. If existence were a property, it would be a property that everything has.

So the sentence

“Zeus does not exist”

is misleadingly constructed. It would be better to say 

“There is no Zeus.”

Even better - if you took everything in the universe, object by object, and lined them up one after the other, none of them would be Zeus. Therefore, when we say that Zeus does not exist, what we mean is 

“Everything is not Zeus.”

This is the clearest way to say what we mean, because it shows that the sentence 

“Zeus does not exist”

is not really about Zeus. It is about everything in the universe! 

So when I say “Zeus does not exist” I do not prove that Zeus has the property of not existing - which would be paradoxical since Zeus can’t have any properties. Rather, I say that everything has the property of not being Zeus. 

And when I prove that nothing refers to Zeus, and then I prove, as a consequence, that that very proof is not about Zeus, that is not a paradox. For proving that no term refers to Zeus is the same as proving that every term refers to something other than Zeus - i.e. something that has the property of not being Zeus. So my second argument is right: My first argument isn’t about Zeus. It’s about every term, and every thing! (and “every thing” doesn’t include Zeus). 

What is the clearest way to rephrase the sentence

“Unicorns do not exist.”

?


The clearest way to rephrase it is 

“Everything (in the whole universe) is not a unicorn.”

If we lined everything in the universe up, none of them would be a unicorn. 

What is the clearest way to rephrase the sentence

“Leprechauns do not exist.”
?

The clearest way to rephrase it is 

“Everything (in the whole universe) is not a leprechaun.”

If we lined everything in the universe up, none of them would be a leprechaun. 

What is the clearest way to rephrase the sentence

“Monsters do not exist.”
?

The clearest way to rephrase it is 

“Everything (in the whole universe) is not a monster.”

If we lined everything in the universe up, none of them would be a monster. 

What is the clearest way to rephrase the sentence

“Horses do not exist.”
?

The clearest way to rephrase it is 

“Everything (in the whole universe) is not a horse.”

This sentence expresses a false proposition, because if we lined everything in the universe up, some of those things would be horses. Horses do exist. 

Existential statements are about everything there is. If I say that there are such things as flying saucers I am saying that not everything is not a flying saucer. In other words I am saying that at least one of the things in the universe is a flying saucer. 

If I say that ghosts exist, what do I mean?

I mean that not everything is not a ghost. (note the two ‘nots’) Something in the universe is a ghost. 

If I say that goblins exist, what do I mean? 

I mean that not everything is not a goblin. At least one of the things in the universe is a goblin.

If I say that ghosts do not exist, what do I mean?

I mean that everything is not a ghost. None of the things in the universe is a ghost. 

If I say that blackbirds exist, what do I mean?

I mean that not everything is not a blackbird. Something in the universe is a blackbird.

it is worth noting here that by ‘universe’ we mean the totality of existence. So the universe includes heaven, if there is one, hell, if there is one, etc. We could call it "the omniverse" if we wanted to stress this. 

If I say that God exists, what do I mean? 

I mean that not everything is not God. At least one of the things in the universe (or omniverse) is God.

If I say that angels do not exist, what do I mean?

I mean that everything is not an angel. None of the things in the universe is a angel.  

Sometimes we restrict the domain of an existential statement when we don’t want to talk about everything in the universe. 

For example, in the sentence

“There are gnomes in my garden”

The domain is restricted to the things in my garden. This sentence says that of all of the things in my garden, at least one of them is a gnome. 

In the sentence 

“There are horses in the field”  what is the domain restricted to? 

It is restricted to the things in the field. it says that at least one of the things in the field is a horse. 

In the sentence 

“There are salt statues in the cellar.”

what is the domain restricted to?

It is restricted to the things in the cellar. The claim is that at least one of the things in the cellar is a salt statue. 

In the sentence 

“There are no monsters in the closet.”

what is the domain restricted to?

It is restricted to the things in the closet. The claim is that none of the things in the closet is a monster.

In the sentence 

“There are maggots in the apple.”

what is the domain restricted to?

It is restricted to things in the apple The claim is that at least one of the things in the apple is a maggot.

In the sentence 

“There are Yetis in the Himalayas.”

is the domain restricted to the Himalayas? (careful!)

No. It is restricted to the things in the Himalayas. The claim is that at least one of the things in the Himalayas is the Yeti. 

Domains are collections of things, not places. 

In the sentence 

“There are more things in heaven and earth than are dreamt of in your philosophy, Horatio.”

what is the domain restricted to? Heaven and Earth? (careful)

It is not restricted to heaven and earth, but to the things in heaven and earth. It entails that at least one of the things in heaven and earth is not dreamt of in Horatio’s philosophy. 

In the sentence 

“There are spiders in the bed.”

What is being claimed about the things in the bed?

The claim is that at least one of the things in the bed is a spider. 

In the sentence 

“There are spaceships in the cornfield”

what is being claimed about the things in the cornfield?

The claim is that at least one of the things in the cornfield is a spaceship. 

In the sentence

“The monster exists in the Loch.”

what is the claim?

The claim is that at least one of the things in the Loch is the monster. 

In the sentence 

“There are dead fish in the anchovie jar!”

what is the claim?

The claim is that at least one of the things in the anchovie jar is a dead fish. 

The sentence 

“There is no such thing as a Wendigo.”

expresses what proposition?

It expresses the proposition that none of the things in the universe is a Wendigo. 

The sentence 

“There are no vampires in America.”

expresses what proposition?

It expresses the proposition that none of the things in America are vampires. 

The sentence

“There are Zombies in the kitchen.”

expresses what proposition?

It expresses the proposition that at least one of the things in the kitchen is a Zombie. 

Statements that are about “all” or “every” thing (s) are called universal statements. 

We have established that negated existential statements (i.e. “don’t exist” claims) are universal statements “in disguise”. E.g. when you say “Unicorns do not exist” you are saying that everything is not a unicorn. 

Hence “There are no Xs” = “Everything is not an X”. 

In the same way, “Everything IS an X” is the same as “There are no non-Xs”. 

Thus...

“All men are mortal.”

means the same as 

“There are no immortal men.” 

What is the domain of this last sentence restricted to?

It is restricted to things that are men. It says that none of those things are immortal. 

The domain of the sentence 

“All cabs are cars.”

is restricted to things that are cabs. 

What is the domain of the sentence

“All students are people” 

restricted to?

It is restricted to things that are students. 

What is the domain of the sentence 

“All swimmers are mammalian”

restricted to?

It is restricted to the domain of things that are swimmers. 

 Translate the sentence 

“All bananas are yellow”

into a sentence that uses an existential instead of a universal.

“There are no non-yellow bananas”

or

“None of the things that are bananas are not yellow.”

In other words if you look at all the things that are bananas, you won’t find one that is not yellow (if the claim is true)

Translate the sentence 

“All women are vertebrates.”

into a sentence that uses an existential instead of a universal.

“There are no non-vertebrate women” 

 or 

“None of the things that are women are non- vertebrates.”

Translate the sentence 

“None of the things that are goblins are not evil.”

into a more natural sentence using ‘all’. 

“All goblins are evil.”

Translate the sentence

“None of the things that are Hollywood films are not great.”

into a more natural sentence using ‘all’.

“All Hollywood films are great.”

Translate the sentence

“None of the things that are Hollywood films are great.”

into a more natural sentence using ‘all’.

“All Hollywood films are not great.”

What is a more natural way of expressing this using the word “no”?

“No Hollywood films are great.”

Translate the sentence

“None of the things that are Broadway Musicals are cerebral.”

into a more natural sentence using ‘no’.

“No Broadway Musicals are cerebral.”

If 

“All the goblins bark”

is the same as 

“None of the goblins don’t bark”

which is the same as 

“There are no goblins which do not bark”

then is “All the goblins bark” true or false? (Be careful)

The sentence picks out a true proposition. 

If there are no goblins, then there are no goblins of any kind, hence then it is true that there are no goblins which do not bark. 

But since 

1. “There are no goblins which do not bark”

expresses the same proposition as 

2. “All the goblins bark”

it follows that if sentence 1 is true, sentence 2 is true. 

So, strangely, “Goblins bark” is false, because there are no goblins, But “All goblins bark” is true, even though (indeed, because) there are no goblins. 

If you are not convinced, consider the following argument by numerical matching. 

If there are 5 pirates on the island, and 5 of the pirates on the island have one eye, then all of the pirates on the island have one eye. 

If the lizard has 4 legs, and 4 of its legs are hurting, then all of its legs are hurting. 

If the church has three steeples, and three of the steeples are in need of repair, then all of the church’s steeples are in need of repair. 

If the man has two dollars, and two of his dollars are in his pocket, then all of his dollars are in his pocket.  

If I have one car, and my one car is in the garage, then all of my cars are in the garage. 

If there are zero goblins, and zero of the goblins bark, then all of the goblins bark. 

If there are zero goblins, and zero of the goblins can sing, can all of the goblins sing?

Yes. All of the goblins can sing. All zero of them. 

Aristotle believed that the sentence "All of the goblins can sing" implies the sentence "There are singing goblins". Logicians no longer follow Aristotle in thinking this.

This is partly because of the reasons given above. But for other reasons too. 

Consider, for example, the sentence 

"All trespassers will be prosecuted!" 

Suppose that this sentence is true. Does it imply that there are trespassers? Presumably not. "All trespassers will be prosecuted" can be true even when there are no trespassers. It is the same with "All goblins are green". This can be true even when there are no goblins. 

Suppose a farmer writes a sign that says "All trespassers will be prosecuted". Suppose that no-one ever trespasses, and so he never has to prosecute anyone. Did he follow his own rule of prosecuting all trespassers? Yes. Since there were zero trespassers, and since he prosecuted zero trespassers, he prosecuted all the trespassers, all zero of them, and so he followed his own rule. 

Or, translating into the claim that uses the existential, there was no trespasser that was not prosecuted (since there was no trespasser at all). 

Here's another reason to think that any sentence that goes "All xs are P" is true when there are no xs. 

Consider the sentence: 

"All horses are mammals"

It clearly implies

"All horses that are ____ are mammals" 

...since if all horses are mammals, then every particular kind of horse must also be a mammal. 

But that means that the following is true: 

"All horses that are green are mammals". 

...even though there are no green horses. 

Similarly, suppose we define a goblin as a small, evil, magical creature. Then, since: 

"All small creatures are light"

is true, so is...

"All small creatures that are evil and magical are light". 

...and that implies that...

"All _______ are light"

...even though there are no _______. 



It implies that

"All goblins are light." 

is true even though there are no goblins. 

Given that there are no unicorns, does the following sentence

“All unicorns are brown”

express a true proposition?

It does. All zero unicorns are brown. 

Given that there are no centaurs, does the following sentence

“All centaurs are obnoxious”

express a true proposition?

It does. There is no centaur that is not obnoxious.

Given that there are no werewolves, does the following sentence

“All werewolves are hairy at night”

express a true proposition?

It does. 
 
Given that there are no werewolves, does the following sentence

“All werewolves are orange”

express a true proposition?

It does. All zero werewolves are orange. 

++trick question alert++

Since “All werewolves are brown” is true and “All werewolves are orange” is true, what color are werewolves?

Werewolves aren’t any color. There is no such thing as werewolves. 

However, you can say 

“All the werewolves are completely brown and completely orange” 

(this is not a contradiction, because there are no werewolves, so there is no problem with all zero of them being completely brown and all zero of them being completely orange) 

But you cannot say 

“Werewolves are completely brown and completely orange” 

...because werewolves do not exist. 

Is the sentence 

“All vampires are mortal”

true?

Yes. All zero of them are mortal. Is the sentence

“All vampires are immortal”

true?

Yes. All zero of them are immortal. 

If both of the following are true...

“All goblins can sing.”

“No goblin can sing.”

That means that there are no goblins. That’s the only way that all of them can sing and none of them can sing at the same time; if all = none. 


If both of the following are true...

“All Snee are black.”

“No Snee are black.”

How many Snee must there be?

There must be zero Snee. That’s the only way that all of them can be black and none of them can be black at the same time; if all = none. 

If all = none, which of the following are true...

“All Gurry's friends are animals.”

“None of Gurry's friends are animals.”

They are both true if all=none. In that case both of them would say the same thing - that Gurry has zero friends. 

Do the following sentences express the same or different propositions?

“All of the zero pirates said “Ar-har!”

“None of the zero pirates said “Ar-har!”

They express the same proposition. In both cases, zero pirates said “Ar-har!”

Chapter 4 - Compound Sentences and Propositions


So far we have been talking about simple sentences and propositions, but other sentences and propositions are compound, as opposed to simple. 

A compound sentence contains other sentences as parts. 

For example the sentence 

“It is not the case that murder is wrong” 

contains the sentence “murder is wrong” as a part. 

What simple sentence is contained within the sentence 

“It is not the case that ‘Terminator 3’ is a good movie.”
?The sentence “Terminator 3’ is a good movie” is contained within that sentence. 

What kind of sentence is the sentence 

“It is not the case that ‘Terminator 3’ is a good movie.”

Compound or simple?It is a compound sentence. Why?Because it contains another sentence as a part. 

What kind of sentence is the sentence 

“It is not the case that there is a bingo game tonight.”

Compound or simple?It is a compound sentence. Why?Because it contains another sentence as a part. What sentence does it contain?It contains the sentence “There is a Bingo game tonight.” as a part. 

What kind of sentence is the sentence 

“It is not the case that Gimli likes elves.”

Compound or simple?It is a compound sentence. Why?Because it contains another sentence as a part. What sentence does it contain?It contains the sentence “Gimli likes elves” as a part. 

What kind of sentence is the sentence 

“Quaid is Hauser and Hauser is Quaid”

Compound or simple?It is a compound sentence. Why?Because it contains other sentences as parts. What sentences does it contain?It contains the sentences “Quaid is Hauser” and “Hauser is Quaid” as parts. 

What kind of sentence is the sentence 

“Harry inspired the novel “Les Oefs” when he ate eggs for virility.”

Compound or simple?It is a compound sentence. Why?Because it contains other sentences as parts. What sentences does it contain?It contains the sentences “Harry inspired the novel “Les Oefs”” and “he ate eggs for virility” as parts. 

What kind of sentence is the sentence 

“Either Professor Plum committed the murder in the kitchen with the chainsaw or Miss Scarlett committed it in the conservatory with the samurai sword.”

Compound or simple?It is a compound sentence. Why?Because it contains other sentences as parts. What sentences does it contain?It contains the sentences “Professor Plum committed the murder in the kitchen with the chainsaw” and “Miss Scarlett committed it in the conservatory with the samurai sword.” as parts. 

What kind of sentence is the sentence 

“It is not the case that Wonka liked Mr Salt.”

Compound or simple?It is a compound sentence. Why?Because it contains another sentence as a part. What sentence does it contain?It contains the sentence “Wonka liked mr Salt” as a part. 

This last kind of compound statement is called a negation. The standard form of a negation begins with the words “it is not the case that”

The negation of 

“Chief Brody thinks they will need a bigger boat.”

is

“It is not the case that Chief Brody thinks that they will need a bigger boat.” 

What is the negation of the sentence 

“Tuco is the brother of Brother Ramirez.”
?“It is not the case that Tuco is the Brother of Brother Ramirez.”

What is the negation of 

“Soylent green is made out of people.”
?“It is not the case that Soylent green is made out of people.”

What is the negation of

“Quaid has had his memory wiped.”
?“It is not the case that Quaid has had his memory wiped.”

What is the negation of 

“Withnail would like cakes and fine wines.”
?“It is not the case that Withnail would like cakes and fine wines.”

Negations of a sentence need not be in standard negation form. Often negations of sentences written in the standard negation form are written in the regular form. 

For example, the negation of 

“It is not the case that Withnail would like cakes and fine wines.”

is

“It is not the case that it is not the case that Withnail would like cakes and fine wines.”

but this is more clearly written as...

“Withnail would like cakes and fine wines.”

which is not in the form of a negation. When negating negations, we more often take the negation away, rather than add another. 
 
What is the shortest way of writing the negation of the sentence 

“It is not the case that Conan will avenge his father.”
?“Conan will avenge his father.”

What is the shortest way of writing the negation of the sentence 

“It is not the case that Luke liked living on Tatooine.”
?“Luke liked living on Tatooine.”

What is the shortest way of writing the negation of the sentence 

“It is not the case that Rocky was a southpaw.”
?“Rocky was a southpaw.”

What is the shortest way of writing the negation of the sentence 

“It is not the case that Stringfellow Hawk was the helicopter’s real owner.”
?“Stringfellow Hawk was the helicopter’s real owner.”

The negation of a sentence always has the opposite truth value to the sentence. 

For example, the sentence

“It is not the case that Conan will avenge his father.”

has the opposite truth value to the sentence

“Conan will avenge his father.”

One of them is true and the other is false. 

if the following sentence is true....

“It is not the case that Luke liked living on Tatooine.”

Then what is the truth value of its negation

“Luke liked living on Tatooine.”
?False. If..

“It is not the case that Rocky was a southpaw.”
 
is true, then what is the truth value of 

“Rocky was a southpaw.”
?False. 

If 

“Stringfellow Hawk was the helicopter’s real owner.”

is false, what is the truth value of the sentence...

“It is not the case that Stringfellow Hawk was the helicopter’s real owner.”
?True. 

Now, since the King of France does not exist, the truth value of the sentence

“The present king of France is bald”

is false. But the truth value of the sentence

“The present King of France is not bald.”

is also false. 

Make an educated guess - What is the truth value of the sentence “It is not the case that the present King of France is bald.”
?The answer is that it is true. Since

“The present king of France is bald” 

is false, its negation

“it is not the case that the present king of France is bald.”

must be true. This might seem confusing since 

“The King of France is not bald” 

is false, so we will spend some time on it. 
The sentence 

“The Present king of France is bald”

is false because there is no present King of France. So there is nothing for the property is bald to be true of. But neither is there anything for the property is not bald to be true of. The King of France can have neither property. So ‘he’ can be neither bald nor not bald. 

That means that it isn’t the case that he is bald and it isn’t the case that he isn’t bald. Because it isn’t the case that he is anything. 

“It isn’t the case that the King of France is bald.”

and 

“It is not the case that the King of France is not bald”

are both true. 

Does the sentence 

“The King of France is not bald”

express the same proposition as 

“It is not the case that the King of France is bald.”

?They do not express the same proposition. The first of them is false and the second of them is true. 

If the fountain of youth does not exist then which of the following is true, 1 or 2?

1. ”The fountain of youth was not filled with green water. “

2.“It is not the case that the fountain of youth was filled with green water.”

?2 is true and 1 is false. Even though we would often confuse these two in ordinary, day-to-day talk, we must distinguish them when speaking precisely. 

If El Dorado did not exist then which of the following is false? 1 or 2?

1. It is not the case that El Dorado was paved with gold. 

2. El Dorado was not paved with gold. 

?2 is false, and 1 is true. 

Strictly speaking, are these sentences the negations of one another?

“The Questing Beast killed many a knight.”

“The Questing Beast did not kill many a knight.”

?Strictly speaking, they are not the negations of one another because they could both be false in the case where there was no Questing Beast. 

Strictly speaking, are these sentences the negations of one another?

“Lincoln was an abolitionist.’

“Lincoln was not an abolitionist.”

?Strictly speaking they are not the negations of one another, for they only have to have opposite truth values given that Lincoln existed, but it is not a logical fact that Lincoln must have existed.  

If 

“It is not the case that Odysseus was crafty.”

is true, then either

1. Odysseus didn’t exist

or

2. Odysseus existed but he wasn’t crafty. 

But if 

“Odysseus was not crafty.”

is true then that means that 

2. Odysseus existed, but he wasn’t crafty. 

If 

“Agamemnon was not strong.”

is true, does that mean that Agamemnon existed?Yes. he must have existed in order that the property of not being strong could have been true of him. 

If 

“It is not the case that Agamemnon was strong.”

is true, does that mean that Agamemnon existed?It does not mean that. It is possible that he did not. 

If 

“Hercules was not too bright.”

is true, does that mean that Hercules existed?Yes. he must have existed in order that the property of not being too bright could have been true of him. 

If 

“It is not the case that Hercules was too bright.”

is true, does that mean that Hercules existed?It does not mean that. It is possible that he did not. 

If 

“He-Man was not Prince Adam.”

is true, does that mean that He-Man existed?Yes. he must have existed in order that the property of not being Prince Adam could have been true of him. 

If 

“It is not the case that He-Man was Prince Adam.”

is true, does that mean that He-Man existed?It does not mean that. It is possible that he did not. 

If both

“George was not insane”

and

“It is not the case that George was insane”

are true, did George exist or not?He must have existed because the property of not being insane was true of him. 

If 

“It is not the case that George was insane”

is false, did George exist or not?Since “it is not the case that George was insane” is false, it follows that “George was insane” is true. But in that case the property of being insane applies to George, which means that he must exist to be the bearer of that property. 

The sentence 

“Ripley killed the alien and she saved the cat.”

is a conjunction. 

A conjunction is a compound sentence composed of two sentences called conjuncts and usually joined by the word ‘and’. A conjunction is true if and only if both halves of the conjunction are true. 

If Ripley did not kill the alien then the whole conjunction above is false. 

If Ripley did not save the cat then the whole conjunction above is false. 

The conjunction is only true if Ripley did both.

Is a conjunction a compound or a simple sentence?It is a compound sentence. 

Under what circumstances is a conjunction true?
A conjunction is true if both of its components are. 

If one of the components of a conjunction is false, is the whole conjunction true or false or neither? If one of the parts of a conjunction is false the whole conjunction is false. 

What are the conjuncts of the conjunction below?

“Ripley hit the switch and the alien was sucked out into space.”
?The conjuncts are 

1. “Ripley hit the switch”

and

2. “The alien was sucked out into space.”

The conjuncts are the parts of a conjunction. 

For the whole conjunction above to be true,which parts of the conjunction have to be true - 1 or 2 or either or both?Both parts have to be true for the conjunction to be true. Which parts have to be false for the whole conjunction to be false? 1 or 2 or either or both?Either. If either of the conjuncts is false then the whole conjunction is false. That's because both have to be true for the conjunction to be true.  

What are the conjuncts in the following conjunction?

“I’m leaving and I’m not coming back.”

?The conjuncts are 

1. “I’m leaving”

and

2. “I’m not coming back.”

For the whole conjunction above to be true,which parts of the conjunction have to be true - 1 or 2 or either or both?Both parts have to be true for the conjunction to be true. Which parts have to be false for the whole conjunction to be false? 1 or 2 or either or both?Either. 

Is the following sentence compound or simple? 

“Either Bill will kill Amsterdam or he will cut him up good.”
It is compound. This sentence is an inclusive disjunction. An inclusive disjunction consists of two smaller sentences - disjuncts usually connected by the word ‘or’. 

An inclusive disjunction is true if one or both of its parts are true. 

What kind of sentence is the following; conjunction or disjunction?

“We will call for them and they will come.”
It is a conjunction. Both conjuncts must be true for the whole sentence to be true. 

What kind of sentence is the following; conjunction or disjunction?

“Either we will call for them or they will come”

?It is a disjunction. What parts of an inclusive disjunction must be true if the whole disjunction is true?At least one of the disjuncts must be true for the disjunction to be true. If the sentence 

“Lucy is in the sky with diamonds” 

is true, what is the truth value of the sentence 

“Either Lucy is in the sky with diamonds or I am really messed up.”

?That sentence is true too, since it is an inclusive disjunction and one half of the disjunction is true. 

If the sentence 

“Lucy is in the sky with diamonds” 

is false, then what is the truth value of the following sentence?

“Lucy is in the sky with diamonds and I am seriously messed up.”

?That sentence is false because it is a conjunction and one half of the conjunction is false. Both need to be true for the whole thing to be true. 

If the sentence 

“Either that’s a Yankee or I can’t tell blue from gray.”

is true, which, if any, of the disjuncts do we know to be true?We don’t know which of the disjuncts is true. We know that one of them is true but we don’t know which one. 

What is the following sentence, a conjunction or a disjunction?

“That’s a Yankee but I can’t tell which way he is going”That sentence is a conjunction. it says two things; that that’s a Yankee and that the speaker cannot tell which way the Yankee is going. The word ‘but’ expresses a contrast between the two conjuncts, but it says that they are both true nevertheless. 

If the sentence

“That’s a Yankee but I can’t tell which way he is going”

is true, which of the conjuncts, if any, do we know to be true?We know that both of the conjuncts are true. if a conjunction is true then both of its parts are true. 

When trying to decide whether a sentence is a conjunction or a disjunction (or something else) try to decide whether it it saying that both of its parts are true, or only one of them. 

Is the following sentence a conjunction or a disjunction?

“Even though the dog chewed the chair, it brought over $150 at auction.”

?It is a conjunction because it says that both halves are true. It says that 

“The dog chewed the chair”

is true and it says that 

“The chair (or was it the dog?) brought over $150 at auction” is true. 

If the sentences 

“Nobody likes a winner”

and 

“Every loser wins”

are both true, is the following inclusive disjunction true?

“Either nobody likes a winner or every loser wins”
?The answer is that the inclusive disjunction is true; if at least one half of an inclusive disjunction is true then the whole thing is true. That includes the situation where both halves are true. 

But what about this...

“Either you will die in an accident or you'll die of natural causes.”

?

Clearly this sentence means to say that one of the two disjuncts is true but not both. This is called an exclusive disjunction. 

An exclusive disjunction is true if and only if one of the disjuncts is true and one of them is false. whereas an inclusive disjunction is true if at least one of the disjuncts is true. 

It can be confusing because the word ‘or’ is used in English to express both inclusive and exclusive disjunction. 

What is the following; an inclusive or an exclusive disjunction?

“Either she drowned or she swam up onto an island.”

?That is an exclusive disjunction; clearly she did not do both. 

What about the following;

“Either you pay me the money or I cut out your eyes.”

?This is an exclusive disjunction too; most threats are. The idea is that by paying the money you get to make the other disjunct false. Which is what you want. 

If I say of someone who passed a hard exam that ...

“Either he worked hard or he is real smart.”

Am I expressing an inclusive or an exclusive disjunction?Inclusive. Clearly what I said would be true if he worked hard and he was smart. 

Normally, unless specified otherwise, by ‘disjunction’ philosophers and logicians mean ‘inclusive disjunction’. We will keep to that tradition here. 


If there are only three things in the universe, Larry Curly and Mo, then the sentence 

“Everything is green.” 

is true if and only if the sentence 

“Larry is green and Curly is green and Mo is green” 

is also true. 

Call the second sentence the corresponding conjunction of the universal “Everything is green” for the universe where only Larry, Curly and Mo exist. 

Clearly, a universal statement “All Xs are P” is true in a universe if and only if its corresponding conjunction for that universe is also true, where the corresponding conjunction is the sentence you get when you take every entity in the universe, apply P to them and conjoin the results. 

In the universe where only Larry, Curly and Mo exist, what is the corresponding conjunction for the statement “Everything is comedic.” ?“Larry is comedic and Curly is comedic and Mo is comedic.” 

The universal statement is true in the universe where only Larry, Curly and Mo exist if and only if this corresponding conjunction is true. 

In the universe where only Porthos, Athos and Aramis exist, what is the corresponding conjunction to the statement “All things are brave”?
“Porthos is brave and Athos is brave and Aramis is brave.” 

Consequently, the proposition expressed by the sentence “All things are brave” is true if and only if ________________________...Porthos is brave and Athos is brave and Aramis is brave.

Suppose that we add D’Artagnan to this universe. Then the same statement has a different corresponding conjunction. What is it? “Porthos is brave and Athos is brave and Aramis is brave and D’Artagnan is brave.” 

Where universal statements have a corresponding conjunction, existential statements have a corresponding disjunction. 

The statement “There is something that is tall” - in the universe where Porthos, Athos, Aramis and D’Artagnan are all the objects - is true if and only if the disjunction “Either Porthos is tall, or Athos is tall, or Aramis is tall, or D’Artagnan is tall.” is true. 

Does the statement "There exists a goblin.” have a corresponding conjunction or a corresponding disjunction? It is existential, so it has a corresponding disjunction. 

In the universe where Porthos, Athos, Aramis and D’Artagnan are all the objects, what is the corresponding disjunction of "There exists a goblin.”? “Either Porthos is a goblin, or Athos is a goblin, or Aramis is a goblin, or D’Artagnan is a goblin.” 

Consequently, the existential statement is ___ if and only if either Porthos is a goblin, or Athos is a goblin, or Aramis is a goblin, or D’Artagnan is a goblin.

Consequently, the existential statement is true if and only if either Porthos is a goblin, or Athos is a goblin, or Aramis is a goblin, or d’Artagnan is a goblin.

Does the proposition expressed by the following sentence have a corresponding conjunction or a corresponding disjunction? 

“Not everything is brave.” 

?This is a negated universal, which is the same as an existential. Hence what we need is a corresponding disjunction. In the universe containing only Porthos, Athos, Aramis and D’Artagnan, what is the corresponding disjunction for the claim? “Either Porthos is not brave, or Athos is not brave, or Aramis is not brave, or D’Artagnan is not brave.” 

With that in mind, complete the following: 

The statement “It is not the case that  ____ is brave” is true in the universe containing only Porthos, Athos, Aramis and d’Artagnan if and only if either Porthos is not brave, or Athos is not brave, or Aramis is not brave, or D’Artagnan is not brave.The statement “It is not the case that everything (or everyone) is brave” is true in the universe containing only Porthos, Athos, Aramis and d’Artagnan if and only if either Porthos is not brave, or Athos is not brave, or Aramis is not brave, or D’Artagnan is not brave.
Chapter 5 - Contradiction and Possibility


In this chapter, we will look at the notion of logical possibility. 

Before we can understand logical possibility, we need to understand when a proposition is contradictory. 

Go to the next frame. A proposition is contradictory if, for it to be true, something would both have to be so and to be not so. For example, the proposition;

Benny is a dog, and Benny is not a dog. 

is contradictory. Without looking back, try to answer the following question. 

When do we say that a proposition is contradictory?

Answer the question before proceeding to the next frame.We say a proposition is contradictory if, for it to be true, something would both have to be so and to be not so.

Is the proposition expressed by the following sentence contradictory? 

“My dog likes liver paste, but he doesn’t like liver paste.”

Answer the question before proceeding to the next frame.“My dog likes liver paste, but he does not like liver paste” expresses a contradictory proposition. It says that something is so (my dog likes liver paste), and also says that it isn’t so (my dog doesn’t like liver paste). 

Does the following express a contradictory proposition? 

“That whistle needs a clean, and it doesn’t need a clean.”

Answer the question before proceeding to the next frame.
Yes. it says that something is so, and also says that it isn’t so. What about this sentence? Does it express a contradictory proposition? 

“There is a banana skin on the top shelf which is not on the top shelf.” 

?That proposition is contradictory too. 

Sometimes the contradiction isn’t so obvious. For example, instead of saying

“it is round, and it is not round”

a sentence might say 

“it is round, and it is square.”

But if something is square then it cannot be round. So this second sentence expresses a contradiction too. 

Go to the next frame. 
Does the following express a contradictory proposition? 

“It is round, and it is triangular.”

?
That expresses a contradiction because if something is triangular, then it is not round. What about the next one?

“It is red all over, and it is green all over.”

Answer the question before proceeding to the next frame.
That too expresses a contradiction, since a thing which is green all over is not red all over. 

What about this one? 

“My nose is in pain, but it doesn’t hurt.”

?
That’s a contradiction too, since if something doesn’t hurt then it is not in pain. Sometimes we say that two or more propositions contradict one another or are in contradiction with one another. We say this when one proposition says that something is so, and the other proposition says that it isn’t so. 

For example: 

“It is round.”

is not contradictory, and neither is 

“it is not round”

But they both contradict one another. 

Go to the next frame. 
“It is red all over”

and

“It is not red all over”

...are in contradiction with one another when ‘it’ refers to the same thing. Why do we say that these two propositions are in contradiction with one another? 

Answer the question before proceeding to the next frame.
We say that they contradict one another because one proposition says that something is so, and the other says that it isn’t so. 

Are the following propositions in contradiction with one another? (assume that they are talking about the same thing)

“The object is spherical.”

“The object is cubical”

?
Yes. If they are talking about the same thing then they must be in contradiction. Something which is spherical cannot be cubical. 

Do the following - said of the same person at the same time - contradict one another? 

“John is cold.”

“John is hot.”

?
Yes, they are in contradiction. If John is cold then he is not hot so long as we are using ‘cold’ and ‘hot’ as natural opposites. 

We must be careful when deciding whether a contradiction has occurred. Sometimes there appears to be a contradiction but with a little imagination there is a way for the claims to be reconciled. 

For example: 

“The banana is on the top shelf.”

seems to be in contradiction with 

“The banana is on the bottom shelf.”

But clearly, if there is only one shelf then the top shelf IS the bottom shelf. In that case the banana could be on the top and on the bottom shelf. 

Go to the next frame.
Are the following propositions, which are both about the same situation, in contradiction? 

“The cop gave me a ticket.”

“The cop gave me a warning.”

?
These propositions are not in contradiction because it is possible for the cop to give me a ticket and a warning. 

Is the following proposition a contradiction? 

“Bob is not a man and Bob is not a woman.”

No. Bob might be a dog, and in that case he would be neither a man nor a woman. The proposition is not a contradiction. The proposition could be true.  

Is the following proposition a contradiction?

Bananas are blue. The proposition expressed by “bananas are blue” is not a contradiction. It is false but it does not say that something is so and that the same thing isn’t so. 

Note the difference:

A proposition is false if it says that something is so when it isn’t so. 

A proposition is contradictory if it says both that something is so and that it isn’t so. A proposition that is contradictory must be false, because it is impossible for both conjuncts to be true at the same time. 

For example, the sentence 

“It is a bat and it is not a bat.”

...must be false, because if it is a bat then the second conjunct is wrong. And if it is not a bat then the first conjunct is wrong. Both conjuncts must be true for the conjunction to be true, therefore the conjunction can never be true. 

If a proposition is false, does that mean that it is a contradiction?It does not mean that it is a contradiction. A false sentence need not be a contradiction, but a contradiction has to be false. A contradiction is just one kind of false sentence. 

We say that a sentence expresses a logical possibility if it is not a contradiction. 

For example, the sentence “All men are married” expresses a logical possibility, even though it is not true. It expresses a logically possibility because it is not contradictory. 

Go to the next frame. When do we say that a sentence expresses a logically possibility? 

Answer the question without looking back and before proceeding to the next frame. We say that a sentence expresses a logical possibility if it is not contradictory. 

Does the following sentence express a logical possibility? 

“All badgers wear coats”

Answer the question before proceeding to the next frame.
Yes. The sentence “All badgers wear coats” expresses a logical possibility. There is nothing contradictory about a badger wearing a coat, even if it is most unusual. 

Note that it is false that all badgers wear coats. But whether it happens to be true or false doesn’t matter. We are interested in whether it is logically possible. 

Go to the next frame. 

We can understand logical possibility better by understanding logical impossibility. A sentence expresses a logical impossibility if it is a contradiction. 

For example, the sentence “It is 3pm right here right now and it is not 3pm right here right now” expresses a logical impossibility. 

Does the proposition “Yesterday was Monday and tomorrow is Friday” express a logical possibility or a logical impossibility? 

Assuming that we mean what we normally do by “Monday” and “Friday”, the proposition “Yesterday was Monday and tomorrow is Friday” expresses a logical impossibility. 

It's logically impossible because it expresses a contradiction. What would have to be so, and also have to not be so, for yesterday to be Monday and tomorrow be Friday? 

It would have to be Tuesday and not be Tuesday (or Thursday and not be Thursday.) 

Does the sentence “A trio of four musketeers is coming this way” express a logical possibility? 
It does not express a logical possibility because the word ‘trio’ applies to groups of three, not four. 

Does the sentence “Three eggs is more than four eggs” express a logical possibility? 
We would not say that this proposition expresses a logical possibility because the meaning of ‘three’ and the meaning of ‘four’ are such that three eggs cannot be more than four eggs. 

A way to spot a logical impossibility is to ask; is this something that you discover to be false by looking? Or is it something you discover to be false by thinking about it? 

If you can tell that it is false just by thinking about it, there is a good chance it is a logical impossibility. Another way to spot a logical impossibility is to try to imagine it. If you can imagine it, that is good reason to think that it is not a logical impossibility. 

For example, you can clearly visualize Abraham Lincoln growing a crocodile tail, which is good reason to think it is logically possible, not logically impossible. 
Let us introduce another notion. The notion of metaphysical possibility. By "metaphysical possibility" philosophers mean possibility tout court. In other words, possibility period. 

Similarly, by "metaphysical impossibility" philosophers mean impossibility tout court. In other words, impossibility period. 

Quite simply, something is metaphysically impossible if and only if it is genuinely impossible.

Isn't metaphysical impossibility the same as logical impossibility? It turns out that the answer is no. 

To see why not, recall that a sentence expresses a logical impossibility if it is not a __________. contradiction. 

In other words, a sentence expresses a logical impossibility if, by examining the sentence and what it plainly implies, it's clear that it says that something is so, and also that it is not. 

A logical impossibility, then, is an impossibility that can be discovered simply by  understanding the sentences involved, and by doing some reasoning. 

But there may be genuine impossibilities that are not logical impossibilities. They are impossible, but the fact that they are impossible cannot be discovered just by understanding the sentences, and applying some logic. 

We will look at some examples in the next chapter. For now, we only need to remember that the situation is just as it is depicted in the following Euler diagram: 

  

If a proposition is metaphysically impossible, does that guarantee that it is logically impossible? 

No. There is a way for a proposition, like X, below, to be outside of the smaller circle while still being within the smaller circle. That means it can be metaphysically impossible without being metaphysically possible. 



If a proposition is metaphysically possible, does that guarantee that it is logically possible? Yes. There is no way to put X in the smaller circle without putting it in the larger circle. 



If a proposition is logically impossible, does that guarantee that it is metaphysically impossible? Yes. If there is no way for it to be in the larger circle, there is no way for it to be in the smaller circle. 



If a proposition is logically possible, does that guarantee that it is metaphysically possible? 

No. It could be in the larger circle without being in the smaller circle. 


The reason you can have logical possibilities that are not metaphysical possibilities is because there can be states of affairs that are genuinely ___________, but that cannot be discovered to be so just by using __________________.Because there can be states of affairs that are genuinely impossible, but that cannot be discovered to be so just by using logic and understanding. 

Anything that's logically impossible is also metaphysically impossible because, if it's logically impossible, then it has been discovered to be genuinely ____________ just by using ___________, but to say that it is genuinely impossible is the same as saying that it is ___________ impossible. 

...if it's logically impossible, then it has been discovered to be genuinely impossible just by using logic and understanding, but to say that it is genuinely impossible is the same as saying that it is metaphysically impossible. 



One intuitive test for metaphysical possibility is whether an all-powerful god could make it so.  

For example the proposition “At noon tomorrow, the President of the USA will develop huge moth wings and fly off to the sun.” appears to be metaphysically possible, because it appears that an all-powerful god could make it happen. 

The proposition expressed by “Three eggs is more than four eggs”, however, is not metaphysically possible, because even an all-powerful god could not make three eggs be a greater number of eggs than four eggs. 

Note: An all-powerful god could make three eggs into five eggs, and so make the number of eggs into a number greater than four, but the god could not keep the number of eggs equal to three, and at the same time make the number greater than four.  

Does the following sentence express a metaphysical possibility? 

“Napoleon had a neck as long as a giraffe.” 

?This sentence expresses a metaphysical possibility, because, though it is false, an all-powerful god could have made it so. There is no contradiction in it. 

Does the following sentence express a metaphysical possibility? 

“Abraham Lincoln drove a Ferrari.”

?This again expresses a metaphysical possibility even though Honest Abe never drove such a vehicle. He could have driven such a vehicle, had Ferrari sold one to him. Had Ferrari existed at the time. 

Does the following sentence express a metaphysical possibility? 

“Next week is the week after next.”
This does not express a metaphysical possibility, because next week is by definition next week. Even if an all-powerful god rearranged events so that the things that were going to happen next week now happen the week after, then next week merely comprises different events. Still next week is next week, not the week after. 

The true propositions of mathematics could not possibly be false. It is metaphysically impossible. For example, It is metaphysically impossible that 2+2=4 be false. As another example, it is metaphysically impossible that 2=2 be false. 

The false propositions of mathematics could not possible be true. 2+3=8 could not possibly be true. Those propositions of math which are false are metaphysically impossible.From now on, when we say that something is "possible" or "impossible", we mean metaphysically possible or impossible. That is to say genuinely possible or impossible, whether or not it can be discovered to be so using logic alone. 

Does the following sentence express a possibility?

18+17=30
That proposition is not possible. Even an all-powerful god could not make 18 and 17 add up to 30. 

Of course an all-powerful god could change the way that we use words, so that the sentence “18+17=30” said something true. In that case, has the all-powerful god made the proposition 18+17=30 into a true proposition? No. In the example, The all-powerful god has simply changed which proposition a particular sentence picks out. The all-powerful god hasn’t changed the truth or falsity of the propositions themselves. 

Is the following proposition possible? 

“Squares have three sides.”
?That proposition is not possible, because squares with three sides would not be squares. 

When it is impossible that a proposition be false, we say that that proposition is metaphysically necessary, or just necessary. 

The proposition “2+2=4” is necessary. It is impossible that it be false. 

The proposition “squares have four sides” is necessary. it is impossible that that proposition be false. 

Is the proposition “2+3=6” necessary? 
This proposition is not necessary. in fact it is the opposite; it is impossible. 

Is the following proposition necessary? 

“Unemployed clowns apply for Santa jobs at Christmas.”

?That proposition is not necessary either, since it is possible for it to be false. It is possible but not necessary. 

Is the following proposition necessary?

“All bachelors are men.”This proposition is necessary since it is part of the meaning of ‘bachelor’ that it apply only to men. 

Is this proposition necessary? 

“104+105=209”

?This proposition is necessary. All true propositions of mathematics are necessary. 

Here is a trick request; 

Give an example of a sentence which is necessary. 

Think about the request before moving on. Why is it a trick? It is a trick because sentences are not the kinds of things that are necessary. Propositions are the kinds of things that are necessary. 

The sentence “Two plus three equals five” is not necessary. But the proposition which it picks out is necessary. God could have made it so that the sentence is not necessary—he could have made it so that the sentence is not a sentence at all (by making English never happen). But he could not have made it so that the proposition 2+3=5 is not necessary. That proposition would have been necessary no matter what sentence was used to pick it out, or even if no sentence was ever used to pick it out. 

Which are necessary; sentences or propositions? Propositions are the kinds of things which are necessary. Sentences are not. 

What kinds of things are possible, sentences or propositions?Propositions are the kinds of things which are possible. Sentences merely pick them out. 

A proposition is necessary if it is impossible that it be false. If X = "it is not the case that Y" and X is impossible, does that make Y necessary? Yes. If X = "it is not the case that Y" and X is impossible, then it is impossible that it not be the case that Y. Hence Y is necessary. 

If X = "it is not the case that Y" and Y is impossible, does that make X necessary? (Note that this is not the same question.) 

It wasn't the same question, but it has the same answer. If Y is impossible, then "it is not the case that Y" has to be true. Since X = "it is not the case that Y", that means that X has to be true. 

Recall from earlier chapters that if X is defined as "it is not the case that Y" then X is the negation of Y. 

Quite generally, a proposition is necessary if and only if its negation is impossible.  Just as there was a distinction between logical and metaphysical possibility and impossibility, so there is a distinction between logical and metaphysical necessity. 

A proposition is metaphysically necessary if and only if it is metaphysically impossible that it not be so. I.e. if and only if its negation is metaphysically impossible. 

You can probably guess that a proposition is logically necessary if and only if it is _________ impossible that it not be so. I.e. if and only if its ________ is _________ impossible. 
A proposition is logically necessary if and only if it is logically impossible that it not be so. I.e. if and only if its negation is logically impossible.

Recall the Euler diagram from earlier: 




Let X be the negation of Y. I.e. X = "it is not the case that Y". Since X, in the diagram, is metaphysically impossible but logically possible, that means that Y is (a) metaphysically necessary (b) logically necessary (c) both (d) neither? 

The answer is (a). The negation of Y is metaphysically impossible, hence Y is metaphysically necessary. But the negation of Y is not logically impossible, hence Y is not logically necessary. 

Suppose that, this time, X is logically impossible. That means that Y is (a) metaphysically necessary (b) logically necessary (c) both (d) neither?The answer is (c). For if X is logically impossible then it falls outside of both circles, and so is metaphysically impossible. Hence its negation, Y, is both logically and metaphysically necessary. 

Keep this in mind and again look at the Euler diagram: 



Draw another Euler diagram with two circles labeled "Metaphysical Necessities" and "Logical Necessities". Is one circle inside the other? Do they overlap? To answer, you need to ask whether, when a sentence is logically necessary, it has to be metaphysically necessary, and vice versa. 

This is the correct answer: 




Whenever a proposition Y is logically necessary, its negation X is logically impossible. That means that, on the original diagram, X is outside of the big circle, and hence outside of the small one, as follows:



Therefore X is also metaphysically impossible. And that means that its negation, Y, is metaphysically necessary. 

Overall, then, we have shown that if something is logically necessary, it is also metaphysically necessary. 

But the reverse does not hold. If a proposition Y is metaphysically necessary its negation X is metaphysically impossible. But that only means that, on the original diagram, X is outside of the small circle. There is no guarantee it is outside of the big one. Hence there is no guarantee that X is logically impossible, and hence no guarantee that its negation, Y, is logically necessary. 

Overall, then, if something is logically necessary, it is also metaphysically necessary, but it may be metaphysically necessary without being logically necessary. That is why w put the circle of logical necessities inside the circle of metaphysical necessities. We could reach the same conclusion in a different way. 

(1) If a proposition can be discovered to be necessary (period) using reasoning and understanding alone, then it is necessary (period). But if it is necessary (period) that does not mean that it can be discovered to be necessary (period) using reasoning and understanding alone. 

"Metaphysically necessary" is just the formal way of saying "necessary (period)". And to say a sentence is "logically necessary" is just a way of saying that it can be discovered to be necessary (period) using reasoning and understanding alone. Hence, by replacing the underlined parts, we get sentence (2) from sentence (1): 

(2) If a proposition is logically necessary, then it is metaphysically necessary. But if it is metaphysically necessary, that does not mean that it can be discovered to be metaphysically necessary using reasoning and understanding alone. 
One area where people get confused is when talking about science. Sometimes people say that the laws of science are like the laws of mathematics; that they have been proved to be true. 

To cite a famous example, Einstein "proved" that 

E=mc2 

This looks like a proposition of mathematics, so it must be necessary, right? 

The answer is ‘no’; this is not necessary. As we shall show.
Suppose that I think that Ralph always eats twice as much food as Dave. I test this proposition by measuring the number of calories that Dave consumes every day, and by measuring the number that Ralph consumes. Sure enough, after a time it seems that Ralph is eating twice as much as Dave every day. The law seems to hold. 

I can express the law using mathematical notation, like this;

r=2d

Where ‘d’ represents the number of calories that Dave eats, and ‘r’ represents the number of calories that Ralph eats. Though I have expressed my findings in a  mathematical style, the fact that Ralph eats twice as much as Dave is not necessary. It is not a logically necessary truth about numbers, or geometric shapes, nor is there any reason to think it is a state of affairs that couldn't possibly be different. It is simply the way things happen to be with Ralph and Dave. Though the Ralph/Dave "law" seems robust, things might have been different. If there were an all-powerful god that wanted to, it could have made Dave the bigger eater.Suppose that I find that the number of eggs the Roadrunner lays increases with the number of traps it avoided that day. I might express my law as 

e=t

this says that the number of eggs (e) equals the number of traps avoided (t) multiplied by some constant (some number or other) . The fact that the way I chose to express my finding is kind of ‘mathy’ doesn’t mean that it is a truth of math, or logic, and that it is therefore necessary. It could easily have been different. It might have turned out that avoiding traps made the roadrunner eat less.

In the same way E=mc^2 is not a truth of logic, or math, and it is not necessary. It says that “Energy equals mass multipled by the speed of light squared” This simply expresses a relation that happens to hold between the quantities of things. But the relation might have been different. 

Is the following proposition necessary? 

“C=λP”

Where C represents the number of offspring of the average crocodile in a given year; P represents the gazelle population and λ some constant (some number or other). 
?
No. That proposition is not logically or metaphysically necessary. The relation between crocodile offspring and the gazelle population might have been different. 

Is the following proposition logically or metaphysically necessary? 

3x+5 = 2x+5+x

where x is any number?
This proposition is both logically and metaphysically necessary because it expresses a relation between mathematical objects that could not be otherwise. Whatever 2x+5 is, adding an x to it makes it 3x+5. so 2x+5+x = 3x=5. 

Is the following proposition logically or metaphysically necessary?

“Three swans plus five swans makes eight swans”
Both. “Three swans plus five swans makes eight swans” isn’t something that you discover by looking at the world. It is a law of mathematics, that could not be otherwise. You don’t even have to know what a swan is to know that three of them plus five of them make eight of them. 

Is the following proposition logically necessary? Or is it impossible to know? 

Three Kibelappalogs plus fifteen Kibelappalogs makes eighteen Kibelappalogs.

?That proposition is logically necessary, and hence metaphysically necessary, whatever a Kibelappalog is. 
The following proposition is logically and metaphysically impossible 

“Squirrels fly south for the winter and we know that they don’t.”

It is impossible that squirrels fly south for the winter and for us to know that they don’t. If squirrels fly south for the winter, we might believe that they don’t, but we wouldn’t know that they don’t. 

Knowledge entails truth. That is to say, if you know something, it follows that it is true. 

Is the following proposition logically possible? 

“Mr Benson is a politician and we know that he isn’t.”That proposition is not logically possible. There is no possible world in which we know that Mr Benson is not a politician and in which he is a politician at the same time. If we know that Mr Benson is not a politician, then it follows that he is not a politician. If he is not a politician, then even if we believe that he is, we are simply mistaken. We don't know it. 

Is the following proposition logically possible? 

“Napoleon was a Frenchman and we know that he was not.”
That is not logically possible. If Napoleon was a Frenchman then we do not know that he was not. If he was not a Frenchman then we could not know that he was.

Is the following proposition possible? 

“Gibraltar is off the coast of Ireland and we know that it is not.” This proposition is not possible, since it is not possible for both halves to be true. 

We often say that something is not possible when it conflicts with what we already know. 

For example we say that it is not possible that Gibraltar is off the coast of Ireland because it conflicts with what we know. We know that it is not. 

We say that it is not possible that squirrels fly south for winter because we know that they do not. 

When we say that these things are not possible, we mean that they are not epistemically possible. They are still logically and metaphysically possible. 

Something is epistemically possible if it does not conflict with what we already know. 

(This is the rough definition of epistemic possibility. A more strict definition will follow.) 
For example, usually we say that it is not possible for the President of the USA to grow giant moth wings and fly off towards the sun, because we know that that kind of thing defies the laws of nature, and we know the laws of nature to be true. 

In other words, given what we know about physics, it is impossible for the President of the USA to grow giant moth wings and fly off towards the sun. 

What do we mean when we say that something is epistemically possible? When we say that something is epistemically possible we mean that it does not conflict what we already know. 

Something is epistemically possible if it is possible given what we know. i.e. if it does not conflict with itself, and it does not conflict with what we already know. (again this is an elaboration of the rough definition)

It is metaphysically possible that Paris be in Spain since it is possible that the Spanish had pushed their border further North to include Paris. However, it is not epistemically possible that Paris be in Spain, since we know that it is not. 

Which of the following is correct:  

(a) a proposition is an epistemic impossibility if and only if it is a contradiction with the laws of nature.  
(b) a proposition is an epistemic impossibility if and only if it is in contradiction with what we already know.
The answer is (b). 

Why is (a) not correct? Because, though it's true that a proposition is epistemically impossible if it is in conflict with the laws of nature, that doesn't mean it is epistemically impossible only if it is in conflict with the laws of nature. It might be epistemically impossible because it conflicts with other things we know. 

For example, the sentence: 

"Killing people for fun is okay." 

Is epistemically impossible. It doesn't conflict with our knowledge of the laws of nature, but it does conflict with our knowledge that killing people without good reason is morally wrong. 

Is the following metaphysically or epistemically impossible? 

“The needle of a compass points to the South Pole.”“The needle of the compass points to the south pole.” is epistemically impossible because it contradicts what we know to be true. But it is metaphysically possible. Had things been different, the needle of compasses might have pointed in the opposite direction. 

If we know that World War I ended in 1918, what is epistemically impossible? 
That World War I did not end in 1918. it is epistemically impossible, since we know that it does not. 

That means that all of the following are also epistemically impossible: 

That World War I didn't end at all. 
That World War I ended in 1920. 
That there was no World War I. 
Etc. 

If we know that Lassie was a dog then what is epistemically impossible? 
That Lassie was not a dog. This conflicts with what we already know, and is epistemically impossible. 

If we know that identically-charged particles repel one another, then what is epistemically impossible? 
it is epistemically impossible that identically-charged particles not repel one another, since we know that they do. 

Is it possible for identically-charged particles to not repel one another? 
Yes. It is metaphysically possible that like particles not repel one another, since the proposition

“Like particles do not repel one another”

Is not self contradictory. However it contradicts what we know, so it is epistemically impossible. 

Is the proposition 

“People never ever eat chicken.”

Metaphysically or epistemically possible? 
It is metaphysically possible because it is a way that things could have been, but it is epistemically impossible because we know that people sometimes eat chicken. 

Is the proposition 

“Elvis Presley was born in the eighteenth century.”

metaphysically or epistemically possible? 
It is metaphysically possible—Elvis could have been born two centuries earlier—but it is epistemically impossible that Elvis be born in the 18th century since that contradicts what we already know. 

The proposition 

“There is life on other planets”

Is epistemically possible. We do not know that it is false. Is it metaphysically possible? 
It is indeed metaphysically possible. An all powerful god could make it so, if it is not already so. 

The proposition 

“One day machines will be able to think”

is not epistemically impossible. Is it metaphysically impossible? 
Hard to tell. There is no contradiction in the proposition, so it is logically possible. But it may not be a genuine possibility. It depends on what "thinking" amounts to, and whether machines can do it even in principle. 

On the definition we gave above, anything that is epistemically possible is metaphysically possible (since if something is possible given what you know, it is possible period.) But the above example may cause us to ask for a more strict definition. So might the following: 

The mathematician Christian Goldbach once wondered whether all even numbers greater than 2 are the sum of two primes. The idea seemed to hold out; 4 is the sum of 2 and 2. 6 is the sum of 3 and 3. 8 is the sum of 5 and 3, and so on. In fact, this idea has proven to be true of every even number we have looked at, and we have looked at a great many.  

But no-one has ever proven it to be true of all the even numbers. It is epistemically possible that it is true, and epistemically possible that it is false. In other words, for all we know it could be true or false. It is epistemically possible that it is true, and epistemically possible that it is false. 

Nevertheless, since it is a proposition of mathematics, either it is impossible that it be true, or impossible that it be false. Suppose that it is false; in that case it is an example of something which is epistemically possible, but not possible. 

To allow for this, we need to make the definition of epistemic possibility more strict. 

A proposition is epistemically possible if, to our knowledge, it does not conflict with itself or anything we know. 

Even though Goldbach’s conjecture may be logically and/or metaphysically impossible, it may still be epistemically possible if we do not know it to be logically and/or metaphysically impossible. 

Chapter 6 - Identity

To say that A and B are "identical" is to say that they are the same. 

But there are two notions of 'the same' that we need to distinguish. 

On the one hand is the "everyday" sense of 'the same'. This is the sense in which identical twins are the same. They look the same, sound the same, are the same height, etc. 

In short, they have the same properties. 

When we want to say that A and B are the same in this sense, we will say that they are indiscernible. 

A and B are indiscernible if and only if every property of A is a property of B, and vice versa. 

Sometimes, though, when we say that A and B are the same, we don't just mean that A and B have the same properties. We mean that they are the same one thing. 

E.g. when I discover that 'Mark Twain' is just Samuel Clement's pen name, I say: 

"The guy I called Mark Twain and the guy they call Samuel Clement are the same." 

Here, in saying they are `the same' I don't just mean that they look the same, sound the same, are the same height etc. I mean that they are the same one person. This notion is what we call numerical identity. 

A and B are numerically identical if and only if A and B are the same one thing. 

Is Superman numerically identical to Clark Kent? Yes. Superman is the same one person as Clark Kent, so they are numerically identical. 

Is Spiderman numerically identical to Peter Parker?Yes. `Spiderman' is just a different name for Peter Parker. There is just one person there, with two different names. 

A and B are ______________ if and only if they have the same properties. A and B are indiscernible if and only if they have the same properties. 

A and B are _______  ________ if and only if they are the same one thing. A and B are numerically identical if and only if they are the same one thing. 

Is the person that is the first African American President of the United States numerically identical to the guy they call Barack Obama? Yes. The description on the left—'the first African American... etc'—refers to the same one thing that the description on the right—'the guy they call... etc'—refers to. So this is a case of numerical identity. 

Is Barack Obama numerically identical to Barack Obama? Of course. (Don't be confused by the fact that that was too easy.)

Generally, claims of numerical identity are obviously true when the same expression is used twice over, e.g. in the sentence "Superman is numerically identical to Superman." 

The same is true in mathematics. E.g. ask yourself whether the following is true: 

3a2 +4b = 3a2 + 4bIt is obviously true, and for the same reason that the sentence "Barack Obama is numerically identical to Barack Obama" is obviously true. 

The mathematical symbol "=" represents that the quantity on the left is the same one quantity as the quantity on the right. It is therefore expressing a kind of numerical identity, restricted to quantities.

When an expression of numerical identity is flanked by the same term on both sides, it is obviously true. So sentences like: 

3a2 +4b = 3a2 + 4b

are just like sentences like 

Obama is numerically identical to Obama. 

And in fact, we sometimes use the equality symbol ``=" to represent numerical identity, not just of quantity, but of anything. 

Express the sentence above, which is about Obama, using the equality symbol. 
Obama = Obama. 

Is the following obviously true in the same way that Obama = Obama is obviously true?  

4a2 +4a = 4a(a+1)No. That might be obviously true. It depends how quick you are make the algebraic transformation. But it is not obviously true in the same way that "Obama = Obama" is obviously true. 

In other words, it is not obvious merely in virtue of having the same terms at either side of the identity. 

When the expression on the left matches the expression on the right, e.g. in the equation 3a2 +4b = 3a2 + 4b or in the sentence  "Obama = Obama", the numerical identity is obvious. But when the expressions on each side do not match more investigation may be needed. 

E.g. for the expression: 4a2 +4a = 4a(a+1) the numerical identity may not be immediately obvious, but after more investigation, in the form of basic mathematical reasoning, it can be seen to be true. 

E.g. for the expression 3a2 +4b = 6c the numerical identity is not obvious, and to know whether it is true you would need more information about a, b and c. So more investigation is needed, and not just mathematical reasoning. 

Is 3(6 + 9) numerically identical to 15 times 3? Yes.

Can you answer the question...

Is Hesperus numerically identical to Phosphorus? 

...just by thinking about it? No. Clearly you have to do more than just think about it. You have to know what the terms "Hesperus" and "Phosphorus" refer to. 

The term "Hesperus" is an old term for what people also called "the evening star", a shining point of light that people have seen in the evening sky since ancient times, that appears near to where the sun set. "Phosphorus" is a term for what people also called "the morning star", a shining point of light that people have always seen in the morning sky, that appears near to where the sun is soon to rise.

It turns out that people were seeing the same thing twice over. It was the planet Venus which, being between the Earth and the sun, sets and rises with it. During the day, the sun outshines Venus and it cannot be seen. And in the middle of the night, both Venus and the sun are at the other side of the Earth and cannot be seen. As a result, Venus can only be seen for a short time just after the sun has set and just before it rises. 

Is Hesperus numerically identical to Venus? Yes. They are the same one thing. 

As with Hesperus/Phosphorus/Venus, the same one quantity may be designated using different expressions, and that can have an effect on how difficult it is to determine whether the numerical identity is true. 
One way to think of numerical identity is that it is identity pertaining to number. To see this better, note that you can sometimes infer identities from claims about quantity. 
E.g. If you know that one person in the room is happy, and one person in the room is tall, and that there is only one person in the room, then you know that the happy person is the same one person as the tall person. 
E.g. if you know that there are only seven dwarves in the mine, you know that only seven dwarves met Snow White, and you know that there are only thirteen dwarves in the world, then you know that at least _____ of the dwarves that is in the mine is _______   _________ to one of the dwarves that met Snow White. E.g. if you know that there are only seven dwarves in the mine, you know that only seven dwarves met Snow White, and you know that there are only thirteen dwarves in the world, then you know that at least one of the dwarves that is in the mine is numerically identical to one of the dwarves that met Snow White.
If you know that there are three women in the room, and you know that there are three boxers in the room, and you know that there are only four people in the room, then you know that at least ____ of the women in the room are ______   _______  to at least ____ of the boxers. You know that at least two of the women in the room are numerically identical to at least two of the boxers. 
In fact, we can define numerical quantificational claims using claims about (i) existence and universality (see chapter 3) and (ii) numerical identity, as follows: 
"There is at least one person" is defined as "there exists an x such that x is a person." 
"There is exactly one person" is defined as "there exists an x such that x is a person and, for every y, if y is a person then y is numerically identical to x."
Rewrite the second of these using the equality symbol: 
"There is exactly one person" is defined as ______________________
"There is exactly one person" is defined as "there exists an x such that x is a person and, for every y, if y is a person then y = x."
"There are at least two people " is defined as " there exists an x and there exists a y such that x is a person, y is a person and x is not numerically identical to y."
Rewrite this using the negated equality sign ≠
"There are at least two people " is defined as _______________________
"There are at least two people " is defined as " there exists an x and there exists a y such that x is a person, y is a person and x ≠ y."
"There are exactly two people " is defined as " there exists an x and there exists a y such that x is a person, y is a person, x is not numerically identical to y and, for every z, if z is a person then either z is numerically identical to x or z is numerically identical to y."
Rewrite this using both the equality symbol and the inequality symbol: 
"There are exactly two people " is defined as ____________________________"There are exactly two people " is defined as " there exists an x and there exists a y such that x is a person, y is a person, x ≠ y and, for every z, if z is a person then either z = x or z = y."
"There are at least three people " is defined as " _____________________________""There are at least three people " is defined as " there exists an x, a y and a z such that x, y and z are each a person, but x ≠ y, x ≠ z, and y ≠ z. "
"There are exactly three people " is defined as "there exists an x, a y and a z such that x, y and z are each a person, but x ≠ y, x ≠ z, and y ≠ z, AND ___________________"
You may need an additional variable, so use z* (zee-star). "There are exactly three people " is defined as "there exists an x, a y and a z such that x, y and z are each a person, but x ≠ y, x ≠ z, and y ≠ z, AND for all z*, if z* is a person then either z* = x, z* = y, or z* = z. "
Clearly this isn't just a way of defining numbers of people. We can use it to define numbers of anything. E.g. 
"There is exactly one cake in the oven " is defined as " ________________________""There is exactly one cake in the oven " is defined as "there is an x such that x is a cake and x is in the oven and, for all y, if y is a cake and y is in the oven, then y = x."
Suppose you didn't know that Hesperus was the same one thing as Phosphorus. But suppose someone then told you that Hesperus was the same one thing as Venus, and that Phosphorus was the same one thing as Venus. Are you now in a position to know that Hesperus is the same one thing as Phosphorus?Yes. 

That's because you are (unconsciously?) making use of two laws of numerical identity. 

The first is the symmetry of identity: 

If A is numerically identical to B, then B is numerically identical to A. E.g. If Hesperus = Phosphorus, then Phosphorus = Hesperus. 

The second is the transitivity of identity. 

If A is numerically identical to B, and B is numerically identical to C, then A is numerically identical to C. E.g. If Hesperus = Venus and Venus = Phosphorus then Hesperus = Phosphorus. 

Let's break down the inference you made at the top of this slide, and show how it makes use of these laws. 1-3 below is not the whole argument, but contains the first three steps in the argument you need to make. Fill in the gap...

1. Hesperus is numerically identical to Venus. (given) 
2. Phosphorus is numerically identical to Venus. (given) 
Therefore
3. _____________________________________ (from 2, by the symmetry of identity)

1. Hesperus is numerically identical to Venus. (given) 
2. Phosphorus is numerically identical to Venus. (given) 
Therefore
3. Venus is numerically identical to Phosphorus. (from 2, by the symmetry of identity)

Here's the next part of the argument. Fill in the gap...

4. Hesperus is numerically identical to Venus AND Venus is numerically identical to Phosphorus (conjoining 1 and 3 using AND.) 
5. If Hesperus is numerically identical to Venus, and Venus is numerically identical to Phosphorus, then ______________________________ (transitivity of identity) 


4. Hesperus is numerically identical to Venus AND Venus is numerically identical to Phosphorus (conjoining 1 and 3 using AND.) 
5. If Hesperus is numerically identical to Venus, and Venus is numerically identical to Phosphorus, then Hesperus is numerically identical to Phosphorus (transitivity of identity) 

To finish the argument, you need a rule called modus ponens. Modus ponens says that when you have a sentence of the form "If P then Q" and you have the sentence "P", then you may infer "Q". Use modus ponens on 4 and 5 to finish the argument: 

6. Therefore ______________________________ (from 4, 5, by modus ponens)

6. Therefore Hesperus is numerically identical to Phosphorus (from 4, 5, by modus ponens)

The first two steps in were "given". We refer to propositions that are granted at the beginning of the argument as "premises". 1 and 2, below, are premises. Finish the argument: 

1. Kal-El is numerically identical to Superman. (premise)
2. Clark Kent is numerically identical to Superman. (premise) 
Therefore
3. _____________________________________ (from 2, by the symmetry of identity)
4. Kal-el is numerically identical to Superman AND ________________________ (conjoining 1 and 3 using AND.) 
5. If Kal-El is numerically identical to Superman, and _______________________, then ______________________________ (transitivity of identity) 
6. Therefore ______________________________ (from 4, 5, by modus ponens)

1. Kal-El is numerically identical to Superman. (premise)
2. Clark Kent is numerically identical to Superman. (premise) 
Therefore
3. Superman is numerically identical to Clark Kent (from 2, by the symmetry of identity)
4. Kal-el is numerically identical to Superman AND Superman is numerically identical to Clark Kent (conjoining 1 and 3 using AND.) 
5. If Kal-El is numerically identical to Superman AND Superman is numerically identical to Clark Kent then Kal-El is numerically identical to Clark Kent. (transitivity of identity) 
6. Therefore Kal-El is numerically identical to Clark Kent. (from 4, 5, by modus ponens)
Here are two premises. Finish the argument in the style above to show that Gandalf is numerically identical to Mithrandir. 
1. Gandalf is numerically identical to Mithrandir. (premise) 
2. Tharkûn is numerically identical to Mithrandir. (premise) 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. Therefore Gandalf is numerically identical to Tharkûn. (from 4, 5, by modus ponens) 

1. Gandalf is numerically identical to Mithrandir. (premise) 
2. Tharkûn is numerically identical to Mithrandir. (premise) 
3. Mithrandir is numerically identical to Tharkûn (from 2, by the symmetry of identity)
4. Gandalf is numerically identical to Mithrandir AND Mithrandir is numerically identical to Tharkûn (conjoining 1 and 3 using AND.) 
5. If Gandalf is numerically identical to Mithrandir AND Mithrandir is numerically identical to Tharkûn then Gandalf is numerically identical to Tharkûn. (transitivity of identity)
6. Therefore Gandalf is numerically identical to Tharkûn. (from 4, 5, by modus ponens)

Gottfried Leibniz suggested two laws linking numerical identity, on the one hand, with indiscernibility, on the other. They are: 
(The Identity of Indiscernibles) If A and B are strongly indiscernible, then they are numerically identical. 
(The Indiscernibility of Identicals) If A and B are numerically identical, then they are strongly indiscernible. 
Both of these are referred to as "Leibniz's Law", which can be confusing. Sometimes, however, the first of these is referred to as "Leibniz's Lapse", since most people do not think it is a logical law these days. 
In any case, we will refer only to the second of these as "Leibniz's Law" in what follows.  
Let's look at the "lapse" first. To understand the principle, and why it is plausible, we must distinguish between strong and weak indiscernibility. The definition of strong indiscernibility is the same as the definition of indiscernibility. That means that, unless we specifically say we are talking about weak indiscernibility, we have strong indiscernibility in mind. 
A and B are strongly indiscernible if and only if every property of A is a property of B, and vice versa. 
Let us intuitively motivate a contrasting notion of weak indiscernibility. Imagine a pair of perfectly identical twins, but they are wearing different colored shirts. One of them is wearing a blue shirt, and one of them is wearing a red. Are they strongly indiscernible? 
No. Since one of them has the property is wearing a red shirt whereas the other has the property is wearing a blue shirt, they do not have the same properties. Hence they are not strongly indiscernible. 
Now imagine that the two twins are wearing the same clothes. But one of them is sitting only a foot away from the window whereas the other is sitting right next to the window. Are they strongly indiscernible? No. One of them has the property of being close to the window whereas the other has the property of being six feet from the window. Hence they do not have all the same properties. 
We may allow, though, that the twins are weakly indiscernible. To be weakly indiscernible, it only matters that the twins have the same intrinsic properties. I.e. properties that they have "in and of themselves", not with reference to anything else. Definition: 
A and B are weakly indiscernible if and only if they have all the same intrinsic properties. 
E.g. Suppose two billiard balls, that are the exact same shape, color, size etc. Might they be weakly indiscernible? 
Yes, they might. If all of their intrinsic properties are the same. 
What if one of them is nearer to the pocket than the other? Does that make them weakly discernible? No. If they are weakly indiscernible, they will continue to be weakly indiscernible regardless of whether one of them is closer to the pocket. 
That's because the property is close to the pocket is not an intrinsic property. It's an extrinsic property. It makes reference to things other than the ball itself. E.g. it makes reference to __________The pocket. 
Suppose that your Ferrari is the same color, size, shape, etc as mine. In fact, by looking at them, no matter how closely, you cannot tell them apart. As it happens, though, they were made at different factories. Are they strongly indiscernible? Are they weakly indiscernible? They are weakly indiscernible since you cannot tell them apart, in and of themselves, no matter how closely you look. But they are not strongly indiscernible because they come from different factories. Hence they have different historical properties. 
A property that a thing has in and of itself, without reference to other things, is an _______ property. Intrinsic property. 
A and B are weakly indiscernible if and only if they share all their ______ properties. They are weakly indiscernible if and only if they share all their intrinsic properties. 
Is being an uncle an intrinsic property? No. Whether or not a person is an uncle is not something that can be determined merely by examining the person himself. It is an extrinsic property. 
Imagine having a medical scanner that could look deeply into a person's tissues, revealing each microbe, each molecule in their DNA, and so on. Could you tell, merely by looking at the person whether they are an uncle? No. Even with such a sophisticated scanner, you could not. You would need additional information. E.g. the DNA of the alleged niece or nephew. 
That's why is an uncle counts as an ______ property. It counts as an extrinsic property. 
Is having feet an intrinsic property? Yes. You can tell whether a person has feet just by looking at the person.
Is being the same height as George Clooney an intrinsic property? No. Whether someone is the same height as Clooney depends not just on them, but on Clooney. So it is an extrinsic property. 
With some properties, it is difficult to say whether they are intrinsic or extrinsic. For example, being tall seems, at first, to be an intrinsic property. But on second thoughts whether a person, or a building, is tall may depend on what the averages are. Would the Empire State Building still be tall if, in the future, the average building was taller? Similarly, is being two meters tall an intrinsic property? Or does it involve standing in a relation to the meter bar in Paris, the official standard of a meter? 
We won't answer these questions here. We leave them open. 
Suppose X and Y are weakly indiscernible. Then, given the definitions we used above, which of the following is correct?  
a. X and Y may also be strongly indiscernible. 
b. X and Y must also be strongly indiscernible. 
c. X and Y cannot also be strongly indiscernible. The answer is a. 
The fact that X and Y are weakly indiscernible guarantees that X and Y have all the same intrinsic properties. If X and Y also have all the same __________ properties then X and Y are also strongly indiscernible. 
If X and Y also have all the same extrinsic properties then X and Y are also strongly indiscernible.
Suppose X and Y are strongly indiscernible. Then, given the definitions we used above, which of the following is the most informative thing you can infer?  
a. X and Y may also be weakly indiscernible. 
b. X and Y must also be weakly indiscernible. 
c. X and Y cannot also be weakly indiscernible.
The correct answer is b. a is also true, but it is not as informative as b.  
If X and Y are strongly indiscernible, then they have all their properties in common. Hence they must have all their intrinsic properties in common. Hence they must be weakly indiscernible. 
Sidenote: Generally, when conditions or notions are described as "strong" or "weak" in philosophy (and for that matter, in mathematics) then the strong condition being met implies that the weak condition is met. 
E.g. If I say that Jones is "strongly wittiful" then, without even knowing what "wittiful" means, you can infer that Jones is also _____  ______. Weakly wittiful. Whatever the conditions are for being wittiful, and whatever "wittiful" means, a case will meet the weak conditions if it meets the stronger conditions. 
Back to the main topic. Suppose a forger creates a perfect duplicate of a ten dollar bill. Is it a genuine ten dollar bill? No, because it is a forgery. It was not created by the government mint. It does not have the property of having been created by the government as currency. 
With this in mind, suppose that I have a piece of paper that is weakly indiscernible from a genuine ten dollar bill. Is it a genuine ten dollar bill? 
(a) Yes. 
(b) No. 
(c) There is too little information. 
(c). It might be a ten dollar bill. ten dollar bills, after all, are weakly indiscernible from other ten dollar bills. Whether it is genuine depends on how it was created. 
Suppose that I have a piece of paper that is strongly indiscernible from a genuine ten dollar bill. It is a genuine ten dollar bill? It must be. For the genuine ten dollar bill has the property of having been created by the government as currency. So, since the piece of paper is strongly indiscernible from the genuine bill, it doesn't just look the same, it too must have the property of having been created by the government as currency. Hence it too must be a genuine ten dollar bill. 
Suppose that I have a genuine ten dollar bill in my hand. Is it: 
(a) strongly indiscernible from itself. 
(b) weakly indiscernible from itself. 
(c) both 
(d) neither
?Both. Everything is strongly indiscernible from itself. Everything is weakly indiscernible from itself.  
Suppose that A is a genuine ten dollar bill, and B is strongly indiscernible from A. Suppose that I own A and have it in my hand, and that I own B and have it in my hand. I want to buy $20 worth of gas. Can I? (Be careful, it's a trick.)
(a) Yes, because both A and B are genuine ten dollar bills. 
(b) No. 
(c) There is too little information. (c). The answer isn't clear, and more information is needed. 
(a) is right that both A and B are genuine ten dollar bills. Since they have all the same properties, and A has the property of being genuine, so does B. 
However, we did not say whether A and B were numerically identical. I may have just described the same one bill twice over. No wonder A and B are strongly indiscernible, in that case. 
Moreover, even if A and B are not numerically identical, we stipulated that they were strongly indiscernible. Hence that means they are in the exact same place! That isn't merely to say they are both in my hand. It is to say they in the exact same region of space, overlapping one another perfectly.
If I tried to hand these two bills to the cashier, the cashier would claim to see only one bill.   
If my car and your car are strongly indiscernible, and your car is in your garage, where is my car? It's in your garage. Not in mine. 
If my car and your car are strongly indiscernible, how many meters away from your car is mine? 
(a) 0 meters. 
(b) More than 0 meters. 
(c) It's impossible to say from the information provided. 
The best answer is (a). If my car and your car have all the same properties, including all the same extrinsic properties, then they must each be the same distance from you, the same distance from me, the same distance from your garage, etc. There is no way to avoid the conclusion that they must be in the same position. 
If your car and my car are strongly indiscernible, who owns your car, besides you? Me. My car, after all, has the property of being owned by me. And your car and my car have all the same properties. Hence your car must also have the property of being owned by me.
Of course, that cuts both ways. You must be the co-owner of my car. 
If your car breaks down at 2pm, does my car also break down? 
(a) Yes. 
(b) No. This is one way in which the cars can cease to spatially overlap. 
(c) There is no way to tell from the information provided. The best answer is (a). Since they have all the same properties, and one of them has the property of breaking down at 2pm, so does the other. By generalizing from this, we can see that not only are they in the same exact place, overlapping one another perfectly, but they are also unable to separate, ever. 
It is for reasons like this that Leibniz thought that strong indiscernibility implied identity. He thought it was absurd to say there were two cars, or two bills, in the exact same place, overlapping one another perfectly. 
But to be absurd in this sense is just to be unintuitive, not to be impossible. 
There is a famous counterexample to the claim that strongly indiscernible entities are necessarily identical. Max Black's spheres. 
Black proposed a universe that contains only two weakly indiscernible spheres, at some distance from one another. He claimed that though they were at a distance from one another, and not overlapping, they were nonetheless strongly indiscernible. 
To see why it is hard to argue with this, suppose you claimed that, since they were in different positions, they therefore had different properties. Then you would have to argue that the positions they occupied were not numerically identical even though they were _______  _______. But that is to lose the argument by admitting that there can be things, in this case places, that can be _______  _______ but not numerically identical. To see why it is hard to argue with this, suppose you claimed that, since they were in different positions, they therefore had different properties. Then you would have to argue that the positions they occupied were not numerically identical even though they were strongly indiscernible. But that is to lose the argument by admitting that there can be things, in this case places, that can be strongly indiscernible but not numerically identical.
You might call one of the spheres A, the other B, and claim that B has the property of being a nonzero distance from A, whereas A has the property being a zero distance from A.  
The problem with this is that these names, A and B, are ways we introduce for talking about the spheres. They do not exist in the universe itself. All that is true in the universe is that each sphere has the property is a ____ distance from itself, and is a _______ distance from a sphere. But in this sense they are exactly alike. The problem with this is that these names, A and B, are ways we introduce for talking about the spheres. They do not exist in the universe itself. All that is true in the universe is that each sphere has the property is a zero distance from itself, and is a nonzero distance from a sphere. But in this sense they are exactly alike. 
We shall turn in a moment to Leibniz's second law, the one that is regarded as a logical law. To get a feel for it, let's first look at a few cases. 
Muhammad Ali is the same person as Cassius Clay. Two different names for the same person.

Hence, the state of affairs wherein Ali beats Foreman is the same state of affairs wherein Clay beats Foreman. They are the same situation, described in different ways. 

If Batman is the same one person as Bruce Wayne, does the sentence “Batman went to Walmart” express the same state of affairs as “Bruce Wayne went to Walmart”? Yes. 

Given that they are the same person, use the term “Bruce Wayne” to express the proposition that Batman captures the joker. “Bruce Wayne captures the joker” is a way to express the same state of affairs using the term “Bruce Wayne”. 

Batman is just Bruce Wayne in a costume. Bruce Wayne is just Batman without a costume. Hence if Batman captures the joker, then Bruce Wayne in a costume captures the joker. Hence Bruce Wayne captures the joker.

If Miley Cyrus is the same person as Hannah Montana, then the state of affairs wherein Miley Cyrus has a fine voice is the same state of affairs expressed by the sentence “Hannah Montana _____________” 
“Hannah Montana has a fine voice.” Either that person (whom we call Miley Cyrus or call Hannah Montana) has a fine voice or not. There is no way Miley Cyrus could have a fine voice while Hannah Montana does not, given that they are the same one person. 
These cases illustrate the indiscernibility of identicals, which is the second of the Leibniz Laws we introduced above. We will refer to it simply as "Leibniz's Law" since the other "law" was shown not to be a logical law after all. 
Leibniz's Law licenses an inference rule known as "the substitution of identicals". 
The substitution of identicals is a rule that says that you can always substitute co-referential terms in sentences without loss of truth. 
Co-referential terms are terms that refer to the same thing. For example, “Batman” (the word) and “Bruce Wayne” (the name) are co-referential terms. They both refer to the same one thing. “Hannah Montana” (the name) and “Miley Cyrus” (the name) are also co-referential terms. They also refer to the same one thing. 
To show that you understand, and knowing that Miley Cyrus is Hannah Montana, apply the substitution of identicals to the following sentence: 

“Miley Cyrus is the daughter of Billy Ray Cyrus”“Hannah Montana is the daughter of Billy Ray Cyrus.” 

Because, according to Leibniz’s Law, everything that is true of A is true of B if A is B, it follows that nothing can be true of Miley Cyrus that is not also true of Hannah Montana. 

If “Cicero” and “Tully” are co-referential terms, what can you conclude about the actual historical individuals Cicero and Tully? They were the same one person. Cicero was Tully. 

Apply the substitution of identicals to the following sentence: 

“Cicero gave a fine speech to the Roman senate.”“Tully gave a fine speech to the Roman senate.”  

If Percy is the Scarlet Pimpernel, then what can we conclude about the terms “Percy” and “The Scarlet Pimpernel”? That they are c_________. Those terms are co-referential. they refer to the same thing. 

According to the substitution of identicals, what can we do with these terms? Whenever one of them shows up in a sentence, we can substitute it for the other without loss of truth. 
The justification for the substitution of identicals is that, if x is numerically identical to y, then anything true of x is true of y, since they are the same one thing. Hence if you have a sentence that says "x is blah blah blah" then, if it is true, it follows that y is blah blah blah.
If Bowie is numerically identical to Ziggy Stardust, then anything true of Bowie is true of Ziggy Stardust. Hence, we can replace "Ziggy Stardust" in the sentence "Ziggy Stardust is a rock god" with the term "David Bowie", to get...
(a) "David Bowie is a rock god". 
(b) David Bowie is a rock god. 
(a) "David Bowie is a rock god". We are talking about the sentence. 
If Don Diego de la Vega is Zorro, what can we conclude about the terms “Don Diego de la Vega” and “Zorro”?That they are co-referential terms.
Two of the following are co-referential. Which? 

(a) Zorro. 
(b) Don Diego de la Vega
(c) “Zorro”
(d) “Don Diego de la Vega”

?

(It doesn't matter whether you know the legend of Zorro. You can answer this anyway...) (c) and (d). Zorro is a man, and men are the wrong kinds of things to be co-referential. It is a category error to think that men can be co-referential. However, “Zorro” is a term, and that is the kind of thing that can be co-referential. “Zorro” is co-referential with “Don Diego de la Vega”. They both refer to the same guy. 

Leibniz's Law is generally accepted as a logical law, lacking possible counterexamples. That’s because it says merely that everything has the same properties as itself. And that’s undeniable. 
Here’s an attempt at a counterexample to Leibniz's Law: 
Jones at five years old is numerically identical to Jones at thirty five years old. But she is not indiscernible from her later self. She is shorter, for one thing.
This is supposed to be a counterexample because it is a case where Jones (at 5) is _______  ________  to Jones (at 35), but Jones (at 5) is not _______  ________ from Jones (at 35). Hence we have numerical identity without strong indiscernibility.

This is supposed to be a counterexample because it is a case where Jones (at 5) is numerically identical to Jones (at 35), but Jones (at 5) is not strongly indiscernible from Jones (at 35). Hence we have numerical identity without strong indiscernibility. 
It is not generally accepted as a counterexample, however. Why not? 
Because if Jones (at 5) really is numerically identical to Jones (at 35) then there are not two people, but one. There is only one person, Jones.
So there is no way to ascribe one property to that one person, and also not ascribe that property to that one person.  
All that we can say is that Jones has the property of being 4 feet tall at age 5, AND the property of being six feet tall at age 35. 
So it is not the case that Jones (at 5) has different properties from Jones (at 35) after all.  They "both" have both of the properties just described. 
To make this more intuitive, we might say that Jones (at 5) has the property will grow up to be six feet tall whereas Jones (at 35) has the property of having been 4 feet tall when he was 5. It's okay to re-describe things this way so long as we understand that we are describing the same properties as before, but just using more intuitive language.
Suppose someone says that Superman is discernible from Clark Kent, since Clark Kent wears glasses but Superman does not. How should we answer? We must say that both Clark Kent and Superman have the same property, e.g. the property wears glasses when dressed as Clark Kent. 
Suppose someone says that Superman is discernible from Clark Kent, since Superman can fly but Clark Kent cannot. How should we answer? We must say that Clark Kent can fly.
"Both" Superman and Clark Kent have the property of not flying when dressed as Clark Kent. And "both" Superman and Clark Kent have the property of flying when dressed as Superman. And "both" Superman and Clark Kent have the property of being able to fly. 
Why do I keep writing 'both' in scare-quotes?  Because the word 'both' connotes that there are two individuals, Superman and Clark Kent. But if Superman is numerically identical to Clark Kent, then there is only one person there, not two. 
So if Superman can burn things with his eyes, it follows that ___________________It follows that Clark Kent can burn things with his eyes. 
This operation is familiar in mathematics. When we learn that some quantity x is equal to some quantity y, we are allowed to substitute one for the other in all contexts. 
It is the reason why we know that if you perform the same operation on both sides of an equality, you maintain the equality. Because by performing the same operation on both sides, you are performing the same operation on the same quantity twice over (though the quantity is usually expressed in two different ways.) Hence you must get the same result. 
From Leibniz's Law, using the substitution of identicals, we can derive another useful result, referred to as "the necessity of identity". 
This is the claim that, for all x and y, if x is identical to y then, necessarily, x is identical to y. 
Go to next frame: 
One way to run the derivation is: 
1. Suppose that a is numerically identical to b (supposition) 
Then: 
2. Everything true of a is true of b. (from 1, and Leibniz's Law) 
3. It is true of a that, necessarily, it is numerically identical to a. (premise, logically obvious) 
Therefore, 
4. It is true of b that, necessarily, it is numerically identical to a. (from 2, 3) 
Therefore,
5. Necessarily, a is numerically identical to b. (from 4, symmetry of identity and a little rewording) 
6. Hence, if a is numerically identical to b then, necessarily, a is numerically identical to b. (from 1 through 5, by conditional proof). 
7. Hence, for all x, y, if x is numerically identical to y then, necessarily, x is numerically identical to y. (from 1 through 6, by proof from an arbitrary case).
A conditional proof is when you prove a conditional (i.e. a sentence of the form "if p then q") by supposing or assuming the antecedent (p) and deriving the consequent (q). In other words, you prove that "if p then q" by assuming that p is true and showing that q results. In the case above, we assumed that a was numerically identical to b, and proved that, in that case, it is necessarily numerically identical to q. 
Were a and b numerically identical goblins? Spoons? Numbers? We didn't have to say, and we didn't have to use any details about a and b in the proof. Because the argument didn't depend on the a and b we chose, we could run the same argument whatever a and b were chosen. That is why we are able to generalize, in step 7, to the claim that this is true for all x and y. We call this proof from an arbitrary case. 
If Superman is numerically identical to Clark Kent, then, by the necessity of identity, __________________If Superman is numerically identical to Clark Kent, then, by the necessity of identity, it is necessarily the case that Superman is numerically identical to Clark Kent. 
If Cicero is numerically identical to Tully, then it is _________ that Cicero not be numerically identical to Tully. (careful: the first gap does not contain the word "necessary") If Cicero is numerically identical to Tully, then it is impossible that Cicero not be numerically identical to Tully. 
The next one is tricky, have a think about it...
If it is metaphysically possible that Albert is not numerically identical to Jack the Ripper, then Albert is _______________ to Jack the Ripper. If it is metaphysically possible that Albert is not numerically identical to Jack the Ripper, then Albert is not numerically identical to Jack the Ripper.
For if it is possible that Albert and Jack the Ripper are not numerically identical, then Albert isn't necessarily identical to Jack the Ripper. But he would be, by the necessity of identity, if they were numerically identical at all, hence they must not be. 
Just as we use the necessity of identity, in this case, to show that Albert and the Ripper are not numerically identical, we can use Leibniz's Law in the same way. In fact, it's much simpler. 
Leibniz's law says, after all, that A and B are numerically identical only if they have the same properties.
So if A and B do not have the same properties, then they are not the same one thing.For example, suppose that we know that Superman can fly. But we have good evidence that poor Jones, who recently fell from a high bridge into a river and broke all of his ribs,  cannot fly. Then we can reason that Jones is not Superman. In more detail: 
1. Superman can fly. (premise)
2. Jones cannot fly. (premise)
Therefore
3. Jones is not Superman. 
Note that this argument is logically valid. I.e. it is perfectly truth preserving. If the premises are true, there is no way for the conclusion to be false. We might be wrong about (1), of course, and we might be wrong about (2), but if they are true, the conclusion is true too. Similarly, if we are looking for the murderer, and we know that the murderer has naturally brown hair, then we can exclude Jones as follows: 
1. The murderer has naturally brown hair. (premise)
2. Jones does not have naturally brown hair. (premise)
Therefore
3. The murderer is not Jones. 
The premises and conclusions here are worded in a natural English way. But they are about properties and numerical identity. Specifically, (1) says that the murderer has the property of ______________________. (2) says that Jones does not have that property.  And (3) says that the murderer is not ___________________ to Jones. (1) says that the murderer has the property of having naturally brown hair. (2) says that Jones does not have that property.  And (3) says that the murderer is not numerically identical to Jones.
There are sometimes problems with the substitution of identicals. We will get into those problems in future chapters. 
Chapter 7 - Attitudes De Dicto and De Re

Many mental states are what we call propositional attitudes. 

A propositional attitude is an attitude taken towards a proposition. Propositional attitudes are normally expressed using sentences with the form: 

Subject + attitude-term + ["that"] + propositional complement.

The attitude term is something like "believes", "desires", "hopes" etc. The propositional complement is a sentence in its own right, that would express a proposition on its own.  

E.g. 

Consider the sentence "Jones believes that Lesley cheated on Tim." It contains the sentence "Lesley cheated on Tim" as a propositional complement.

Of course, the same person can take different attitudes to the same proposition. E.g. think of as seven or eight ways to fill in the blank: 

Jones ______ that it is going to rain.

Jones hopes that it is going to rain. 
Jones desires that it is going to rain. 
Jones wishes that it is going to rain. 
Jones is mad that it is going to rain. 
Jones is glad that it is going to rain. 
Jones is happy that it is going to rain. 
Jones regrets that it is going to rain. 
Jones remembers that it is going to rain. 
Jones sees that it is going to rain. 

Clearly, there are many attitudes that can be taken to the same proposition, corresponding to a range of mental states. 

In the sentence: 

"Smith hopes that Lesley will now be free to date him."

What is the propositional complement? 
"Lesley will now be free to date him." I.e. the sentence that says that Lesley will now be free to date Smith. The propositional complement is a sentence within a sentence, which appears after the word “that”.

In the sentence:

"Mike thinks that Smith is a creep."

..what's the propositional complement? 
The propositional complement is "Smith is a creep." 

The propositional complement is a sentence in its own right. A sentence, as we learned earlier, is something that expresses a proposition. 

With this in mind, is the propositional complement a proposition? No. Because it is a sentence, it expresses a proposition. But it is not itself a proposition. It is a sentence. 

In the sentence: 

"Sarah wishes that Mike would stop judging people."

...the word "wishes" is the at_____de-term. The word wishes is the attitude term. It is the term that expresses the propositional attitude being expressed. 

Complete the following: Propositional attitudes are normally expressed using sentences with the form: 

s______ + a_______-term + ["that"] + p_______    c________.

Propositional attitudes are normally expressed using sentences with the form: 

Subject + attitude-term + ["that"] + propositional complement.

The word "that" is placed in [square brackets] to indicate that, sometimes, we omit it. 

The propositional attitude sentences...

(i) Jones wishes it would rain. 
(ii) Smith wishes it would rain. 

...have something in common. What? (say all that apply)

a. They have the same subject. 
b. They have the same attitude-term. 
c. They have the same propositional complement. They have the same attitude-term and the same propositional complement. 

What do the following propositional attitude sentences have in common? The subject term, the attitude term or the propositional complement? 

(i) Jones believes that the Lakers will win. 
(ii) Jones hopes that the Kings will lose. 
Only the subject term. What do the following propositional attitude sentences have in common? 

(i) Smith hopes that there will be no earthquakes. 
(ii) Jones knows that there will be no earthquakes. 
? Only the propositional complement. 

Propositional attitudes are said to be intentional. That means they are about something. 

Given this brief introduction, try to guess which of the following are intentional: 

(a) Sentences. 
(b) Books. 
(c) Atoms. 
(d) Chairs. 
(e) Thoughts. 

(a) sentences (b) books and (e) thoughts are all intentional. They are about something. Atoms and chairs are not intentional. They are not about anything. 

Which of the following are intentional: 

(a) Words. 
(b) Songs. 
(c) TV shows. 
(d) Youtube clips. 
(e) Beliefs. 

?All of those are about something, so they are all intentional. 

Are umbrellas intentional? 
No. It makes no sense to say an umbrella is about something. 

Are walls intentional? 

No. It makes no sense to say walls are about something. 

Are hymns intentional? Yes. Hymns are about something, usually something religious. 

Different kinds of thing can be intentional. Humans are intentional systems, since they are systems that are capable of tokening intentional states. A belief is a kind of intentional state. It is a state of the organism that has intentional content. The intentional content of the belief Jones has when Jones believes that it's raining is the proposition, it's raining. 

Smith believes that the sun is shining. Which of the following is an intentional system: 
a. Smith. 
b. Smith's belief. 
c. The proposition that the sun is shining. 
?Smith is the intentional system. Which of the following is the intentional state? 
a. Smith. 
b. Smith's belief. 
c. The proposition that the sun is shining. 
?Smith's belief is the intentional state. Which of the following is the intentional content? 

a. Smith. 
b. Smith's belief. 
c. The proposition that the sun is shining. 
?The proposition that the sun is shining. 

In the sentence "Smith believes that the rules are unfair" the proposition the rules are unfair is: 

a. The intentional content. 
b. The propositional complement. 
c. Both. 
? 

(keep in mind the distinction between sentences and propositions) 
The proposition is the intentional content. You can say that the propositional complement is propositional because it expresses a proposition. But we do not count it as a proposition.

The propositional complement is part of a sentence, and is a s_______ in its own right. But it is not a p_________. It merely e_______ a p_________. The propositional complement is part of a sentence, and is a sentence in its own right. But it is not a proposition. It merely expresses a proposition. 

What's the intentional content of the attitude that Jones takes when Jones wishes he hadn't bought a dog? 

a. The proposition that Jones didn't buy a dog. 
b. The sentence "Jones didn't buy a dog." 
c. Both. 
? It's the proposition that Jones didn't buy a dog. 

Which of the following can have intentional content? 

a. Hopes. 
b. Desires. 
c. Wishes. 
d. Beliefs. 
? All of the above. One can hope, desire, wish or believe that (e.g.) it is raining. In which case the proposition it is raining is the intentional content of the hope, desire, wish or belief. 

We say that hopes, desires, wishes and beliefs are all i__________  s______. 

We say that hopes, desires, wishes and beliefs are all intentional states. 

In the propositional attitude sentence "Jones hopes the digs are habitable" the subject expresses the i___________ s_____, the attitude-term expresses the i________ s____ and the propositional complement expresses the i__________ c_______. In the propositional attitude sentence "Jones hopes the digs are habitable" the subject expresses the intentional system, the attitude-term expresses the intentional state and the propositional complement expresses the intentional content.

Not all mental states are intentional states. At least, it seems likely that some are not. For example, when one sees an after-image after staring at a light, it seems wrong to say that the afterimage is about something. 

Rank the following in the order of how clearly they seem to count as intentional states, with number 1 as "most intentional" and number 5 as "least intentional": 

a headache
a feeling of dizziness
a belief that it's raining
a feeling of foreboding
a ringing in the earsNumber 1 probably ought to be the belief that it's raining. After that, it's arguable. 

A headache might be thought to represent tissue trauma or damage to the head, in which case it is about something. But maybe you could argue that it does not represent anything. 
A feeling of dizziness might represent that one is off balance, in which case it is about something. But maybe you could argue that it does not represent anything. 
A feeling of foreboding might represent that something bad is going to happen, in which case it is about something. But maybe you could argue that it does not represent anything. 
A ringing in the ears might (falsely) represent a something ringing in the world. In that case it is about something. But maybe you could argue that it does not represent anything. 


Propositional attitudes have a strange property. They create contexts in which the substitution of identicals appears to fail. 

For example, take the sentence "Lois believes that Superman can fly". Since "Superman" and "Clark Kent" are co-referential terms, what do you get if you substitute one term for the other? You get the sentence "Lois believes that Clark Kent can fly." 

However, though the first sentence is true, the second may be false. This is puzzling since substitution of identicals is supposed to allow you to replace co-referential terms without loss of truth! 

This problem comes up in arguments. The following argument appears to have true premises, and it proceeds by substitution of identicals:  

1. Lois believes that Superman can fly. 
2. Superman is Clark Kent. 
Therefore
3. Lois believes that Clark Kent can fly. 

But even though the premises are true and the inference is just the replacement of co-referential terms, the conclusion may be false. 

The problem above is sometimes referred to as the problem of substituting into intentional contexts. The "intentional context" is the same as the propositional complement. 

Which part of the following sentence is the intentional context? 

Smith believes that the world is ending. 

?"The world is ending." I.e. the propositional complement. 

An intentional context is one example of an opaque context. An opaque context is one where substitution of identicals can fail. The word "opaque" here signifies that it is not possible to "see through" the referring terms to the things referred to. E.g. when Lois believes that Superman can fly but doesn't believe that Clark Kent can fly, she cannot "see through" the referring terms "Superman" and "Clark Kent" to see that they refer to the same one person. 

If I substitute "Samuel Clement" for "Mark Twain" in the sentence: 

"Hannah believes that Mark Twain wrote "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn""

... I may lose truth. This is because I am substituting into an o_______ ________. It is because I am substituting into an opaque context. What kind of opaque context? 

An intentional context. 

An intentional context is a kind of opaque context. Not all opaque contexts are intentional, and we will see other opaque contexts later. 

If I substitute "Samuel Clement" for "Mark Twain" in the following, am I likely to make an error? 

"Mark Twain was the author of "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn." 

(a) No. 
(b) Yes, because it involves substituting into an opaque context. (a) No. There is no opaque context here. Look again: 

"Mark Twain was the author of "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn." 

This sentence has no propositional complement, hence no intentional context. Contrast with: 

"Sarah believes that Mark Twain was the author of "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn." 
"Sarah hopes that Mark Twain was the author of "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn."
"Sarah thinks that Mark Twain was the author of "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn."
"Sarah wishes that Mark Twain was the author of "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn."
"Sarah remembers that Mark Twain was the author of "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn."
"Sarah doubts that Mark Twain was the author of "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn."
"Sarah dreads that Mark Twain was the author of "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn."

All of the above are examples of propositional __________. All of the above are examples of propositional attitudes.

It is in the context of propositional attitudes that substitution of identicals can fail. That's because there is the possibility of substituting into _______ contexts. There is the possibility of substituting into opaque contexts, or intentional contexts. 

Suppose that someone argues as follows: 

1. Jones knows that he showers every morning. 
2. Jones is the person they call Smelly behind his back.  
Therefore 
3. Jones knows that the person they call Smelly behind his back showers every morning. 

The problem with the argument is that Jones may not know that Jones is called Smelly behind his back. More formally, the problem is that the inference to (3) involves substitution into an ________   __________. The problem is that the inference to (3) involves substitution into an opaque context, or intentional context.    

An opaque context is a context where the law of ______  __  ________ may fail. An opaque context is a context where the law of substitution of identicals may fail. 

In a propositional attitude sentence, after the "that" there appears a ________ complement. In a propositional attitude sentence, after the "that" there appears a propositional complement. 

When you substitute for co-referential terms in a propositional complement of a propositional attitude sentence, you thereby __________ into an o_______  _______. When you substitute for co-referential terms in a propositional complement of a propositional attitude sentence, you thereby substitute into an opaque context. 

In a propositional attitude sentence, the opaque context comes after the word ____. In a propositional attitude sentence, the opaque context comes after the word "that". 

In a propositional attitude sentence, the part after the word "that" is called the propositional ________ and counts as an o______  _______, i.e. a place where the _________ of _________ may fail. In a propositional attitude sentence, the part after the word "that" is called the propositional complement and counts as an opaque context, i.e. a place where the substitution of identicals may fail.

It would be nice, though, to understand why the substitution of identicals may fail. How is that even possible, when, if x and y are true, then anything true of x is also true of y? 

In the end, we will see that, when used properly, the substitution of identicals never fails. The problem is that, when we are dealing with opaque contexts, it is easy to use the substitution of identicals improperly. 

Go to the next frame. Note that sentences of indirect speech, like 

"The chemistry teacher said that H20 evaporates at 100° C."
"The German speaker said that snow is white." 

...are a lot like propositional attitude sentences. Compare the structures:

Propositional Attitude = Subject + attitude-term + "that" + propositional complement. 
Indirect Speech = Subject + "said" + "that" + propositional complement.

It stands to reason that we could learn about the one by looking at the other. 

Go to the next frame. 
Suppose a chemistry teacher says "H20 evaporates at 100° C."

Which of the following seems like the best thing to say? 

(a) The chemistry teacher said that water evaporates at 100° C.
(b) The chemistry teacher did not say that water evaporates at 100° C.
(c) Both (a) and (b) are true, but in different senses. 

?The best answer is (c). 

If you are talking about the chemistry teacher's exact words, she didn't mention "water". She talked about H20. 

But she did say something about the stuff water, by referring to it as H20. She said that that stuff boils at 100° C.

Suppose a German speaker says "Schnee ist weiss." 

"Schnee" is the German word for snow, "ist" means "is", and "weiss" is the German word for white. 

Which of the following is true: 

(a) The German speaker said that snow is white.
(b) The German speaker did not say that snow is white.
(c) Both (a) and (b) are true, in different senses. 

?(c) is the best answer. Did the German speaker use the exact words “Snow is white"? No. Did she say of snow that it is white? Yes. 

We might say that the German speaker, speaking of the stuff snow, said that it is white. 
We might say that the German speaker, using those words, did not say that snow is white. 

The latin term de re is a bit like the italicized phrase "speaking of the stuff". 
The latin term de dicto is a bit like the italicized phrase, "using those words". 

“De re” means “of the stuff” or "of the thing". ("Re" is the same "re" we find in "reality", meaning "the things out there".) 

“De dicto” means “of the words” ("dict" is the same "dict" we find in "dictionary".)
To believe, de dicto, that snow is white is to be disposed to assent to the words "snow is white". I.e. to be disposed to say they express a truth. 

To believe, de re, that snow is white is to be disposed to assent to some way of saying that snow is white, however it might be phrased. 

For example, suppose that our German speaker knows no English. One day, he says in earnest, “Schnee ist weiss!”.

(a) Does he believe that snow is white de dicto?
(b) Does he believe that snow is white de re? 

(a) No. He would not assent to the words "snow is white" since he would not understand them. 
(b) Yes. He believes of the stuff, snow, that it is white. 

To test whether an agent believes a sentence de dicto or de re, or both, we check to see 

(a) whether that agent would agree to the sentence as stated. If he/she would, then the proposition is believed de dicto. 

(b) whether the agent would agree to that state of affairs obtaining under some form of words. If so, then the proposition is believed de re. 

If Jones believes that snow is white de re, does he believe that snow is white de dicto? Not necessarily. He believes that snow is white under some form of words. He might not believe it under the form of words "snow is white". 

Jones believes that snow is white de dicto. Does he believe it de re? Yes. If he believes it de dicto, he believes it under the form of words "snow is white". Hence he believes it under some form of words. Hence he believes it de re. 

If Jones doesn't believe that snow is white de re, is it possible he believes it de dicto? No. If Jones does not believe it de re, then he doesn't believe it under any form of words. Hence he does not believe it under the form of words "snow is white". 

If Jones does not believe that snow is white de dicto, might he nevertheless believe it de re? 

Yes. He doesn't believe it de dicto, which means he doesn't believe it under the form of words "snow is white". But he may believe it under some other form of words, and hence believe it de re. 

The de re/ de dicto distinction often comes up when sentences contain co-referential terms. For in that case the subject may not know that the terms are co-referential. 

For example, suppose that Bert Sugar believes that Muhammad Ali was the greatest fighter who ever lived, but he does not know that Muhammad Ali is Cassius Clay. Would he agree to the sentence “Cassius Clay is the greatest fighter who ever lived.” ?No. He believes that Muhammad Ali was the greatest fighter who ever lived, and he does not know that Muhammad Ali is Cassius Clay, so he would not agree to the sentence “Cassius Clay is the greatest fighter who ever lived.”

Hence he does not believe de _____ that Cassius Clay is the greatest fighter who ever lived.He does not believe de dicto that Cassius Clay is the greatest fighter who ever lived.


Does he believe that Cassius Clay is the greatest fighter who ever lived, de re? Yes. Why? Because he believes that Muhammad Ali is the greatest fighter who ever lived. Muhammad Ali is Cassius Clay, so he believes of that man that he is the greatest fighter. He just would not use the words “Cassius Clay” when describing that man, or that state of affairs. 

Suppose that Bert Sugar believes that Ali was the most sharp tongued boxer who ever lived. Does he believe that Cassius Clay was the most sharp tongued boxer who ever lived...

(a) de dicto
(b) de re

?(a) No. 
(b) Yes. 

There is a form of words, namely: 

"Muhammad Ali is the most sharp tongued fighter who ever lived." 

....that (a) describes the state of affairs in which that man (Muhammad Ali/Cassius Clay) is the most sharp tongued, that (b) Sugar would agree to. Hence Sugar believes in that state of affairs, de re. But since he does not know that Ali is Clay, he would not agree to the sentence 

“Clay is the most sharp tongued fighter who ever lived”

Hence he does not believe that Clay is the most sharp tongued, de dicto. One way to think of the distinction is this: 

When Sugar believes something de dicto, he believes that those words express a truth. 
When Sugar believes something de re, he believes that the corresponding state of affairs obtains. 

E.g. when Sugar believes that Ali was the greatest, de dicto, he believes that the words "Ali was the greatest" express a truth. In that sense, his belief is primarily about a sentence, and only incidentally about Ali. 

When Sugar believes that Ali was the greatest, de re, he believes that the state of affairs in which Ali was the greatest is a state of affairs that obtains. In this sense, his belief is primarily about the state of affairs. Not the words used to express it. 

With this understanding in mind, when we say that Lois believes that Superman can fly de dicto, is her belief primarily about the form of words or the state of affairs?  The form of words "Superman can fly." She believes that those words express the t_____. 
That they express the truth. When Lois believes that Superman can fly de re, her belief is primarily 

(a) about the words “Superman can fly”. 
(b) about the individual, Superman.  (b). Beliefs considered de re are about the things themselves, not the words we use to express them. 

When I ask whether Lois believes that Clark Kent can fly de re, am I primarily asking whether she believes the words "Clark Kent can fly" are true? No. I am asking whether she thinks that guy can fly, under some form of words or other. 

Lois thinks that Superman can fly. As it happens, Superman is Clark Kent. Is there a description under which Lois thinks that Clark Kent can fly?

Yes. She thinks that Superman can fly. And “Superman” is a name for Clark Kent. So there is a description under which she thinks that Clark Kent can fly. 

Does she think that Clark Kent can fly, de dicto? No. She does not think that the sentence "Clark Kent can fly" expresses a truth. She does not agree to it when expressed like that. 

Before Lois ever finds out about Clark's secret identity, does Lois believe that Clark Kent  can fly, de re? 

(Careful!) Yes. She thinks that Superman can fly. So she thinks of that guy, Clark, that he can fly. 

Before Lois ever finds out about Clark's secret identity, does Lois believe that Clark Kent is Superman? 

(a) de re? 
(b) de dicto?

(careful) 

She does not think that Clark Kent is Superman de dicto. She would not agree to the sentence "Clark Kent is Superman." 

But she does believe that Clark Kent is Superman de re! 

Why? Because she believes, de dicto, that S_________ is Superman. Because she believes, de dicto, that Superman is Superman!

Since "Superman" and "Clark Kent" are co-referential terms, the sentence "Superman is Superman" expresses the same state of affairs as "Clark Kent is Superman". They both say that that guy is numerically identical with Superman. 

Suppose that Jones does not believe, de re, that Clark Kent is Superman.
 
(i) Does he believe, de dicto, that Superman is Superman? (yes / no / impossible to answer) 
(ii) Does he believe, de re, that Superman is Superman? (yes / no / impossible to answer)

(be very careful) No and no. 

(i) If Jones does not believe, de re, that Clark Kent is Superman then he doesn't believe, under any form of words, that that guy is Superman. Hence he does not even believe it under the form of words "Superman is Superman”. Therefore he does not believe it de dicto. 

(It may seem strange to say that Jones doesn't even believe that the words “Superman is Superman” express a truth, but maybe Jones thinks Superman doesn't exist, and so he doesn't think anyone is Superman. Or maybe he hasn't heard of Superman, so he doesn’t have any thoughts or beliefs about him. Or maybe Jones does not speak English.)

(ii) Since he doesn't believe it under any form of words, he doesn't believe it de re. 


Let's look again at the argument from earlier. 

1. Lois believes that Superman can fly. 
2. Superman = Clark Kent. 
Therefore, 
3. Lois believes that Clark Kent can fly. 

From premise 1, can we say whether Lois believes that Superman can fly (i) de dicto, (ii) de re or (iii) both? 
Both. She believes it under the form of words "Superman can fly." Hence she believes it de dicto. And since she believes it under some form of words, she also believes it de re. 

Now look at the argument again.

1. Lois believes that Superman can fly. 
2. Superman = Clark Kent. 
Therefore, 
3. Lois believes that Clark Kent can fly.

Examples like this are often used as examples of bad arguments. The problem is supposed to be that (before Lois ever learns of Superman’s secret identity) the premises are true but the conclusion is false. 

However, things are not quite that simple. Look again at the conclusion. Is it: 

(i) False de dicto but not false de re. 
(ii) False de re but not false de dicto. 
(iii) Both false de re and false de dicto.  
or 
(iv) Neither false de re nor false de dicto.  (i) False de dicto but not false de re.

Why is it not false de re? 
Because premise 1 assures us that Lois does believe that Clark Kent can fly, de re. She believes in that state of affairs in which that guy flies. So though she doesn't agree that Clark Kent can fly under that form of words, she agrees to it under a different form of words. 

It helps to reformulate the argument to make the de re and de dicto readings more pronounced. 

De Re Argument

1a. Lois believes, of the guy who is Superman, that he can fly. 
2a. Superman = Clark Kent. 
Therefore, 
3a. Lois believes, of the guy who is Clark Kent, that he can fly.

De Dicto Argument
1b. Lois believes that the sentence "Superman can fly" expresses a truth.
2b. Superman = Clark Kent. 
Therefore,
3b. Lois believes that the sentence "Clark Kent can fly" expresses a truth. 

The first argument is valid, but the second one is not. That’s because premise 2b only assures us that the thing Superman = the thing Clark Kent. It does not tell us that the word “Superman” = the words “Clark Kent”. So there is a mismatch with 1b and 3b, which are about words. 




Consider the following (bad) argument: 

1. Obviously, the murderer is the murderer.   
2. But it’s not obvious that John Smith is the murderer.  
3. Therefore the murderer is obviously the murderer but John Smith is not obviously the murderer. 
4. Therefore there is something true of the murderer that is not true of John Smith. 
5. If there is something true of the murderer that is not true of John Smith, then John Smith is not the murderer. 
4. Therefore John Smith is not the murderer. 

But now suppose that, despite this, John Smith is the murderer. Then what went wrong with the argument?

In that case, John Smith does have all the same properties as the murderer. In particular, he has the property of being obviously the murderer when referred to as “the murderer”, and the property of not obviously being the murderer when referred to using the name “John Smith”. The argument is fallacious because the first premise is only true on its de dicto reading, but it needs to be true on its de re reading.

Why does he need to be true de re? To answer this, first answer the following question: 

If John Smith is not obviously the murderer de dicto, does that mean that: 

(a) John Smith (the thing) does not have the property of being obviously the murderer. 

or

(b) “John Smith is the murderer” is not a sentence that is obviously true.

?The answer is (b). When you know something de dicto, you know that the words express a truth. Hence you know something about the words. 

If you know that John Smith is the murderer, you know that the words “John Smith is the murderer” express a truth. Hence you know something about the words. 

Conversely, if you don’t know that John Smith is the murderer, de dicto, you don't know that those words express a truth. 

Correspondingly, if John Smith is not known, de dicto, to be the murderer, is that a fact about 

(a) John Smith
(b) The words “John Smith is the murderer”. 

?It’s a fact about the words “John Smith is a murderer.” It’s the fact that those words are not known to express a truth. 

Translate the following two sentences so that they are clearly claims about sentences: 

1. Jack the Ripper is known, de dicto, to be the murderer. 
2. John Smith is not known, de dicto, to be the murderer. 

1. “Jack the Ripper is the murderer” is known to be true. 
2. “John Smith is the murderer” is not known to be true. 

This means that _____________ and ______________ have different properties. 

This means that the sentence “Jack the Ripper is the murderer” and the sentence “John Smith is the murderer” have different properties. 

This in turn means that _______________________ is not the same one thing as __________________.This in turn means that the sentence “Jack the Ripper is the murderer” is not the same one thing as the sentence “John Smith is the murderer”. 

Hence, once we appreciate that knowledge de dicto is knowledge about the sentences that express the states of affairs, not knowledge about the state of affairs, we can see that the only non-identity you can infer is the non-identity of the sentences, not the non-identity of the individuals involved in the state of affairs. 

Hence, to infer the non-identity of Jack the Ripper and John Smith using the argument we used, you need the knowledge in the first premises to be knowledge de re, like this:  

1. Jack the Ripper is known de re to be the murderer. 
2. John Smith is not known de re to be the murderer. 
3. Therefore John Smith and Jack the Ripper have different properties. One is known to be the murderer whereas the other is not. 
4. Therefore, if John Smith is Jack the Ripper, then John Smith has different properties from himself. 
5. But everything has the same properties as itself. 
6. Therefore John Smith is not Jack the Ripper.

However, in the case where John Smith really is Jack the Ripper, premise 2 is just plain false. For John Smith IS known to be the murderer _____. After all, __________ is known to be the murderer, and that’s just a different description of the same state of affairs in which  ___________ is known to be the murderer. Hence ______ is known to be the murderer after all, de re. 

In the case where John Smith really is Jack the Ripper, premise 2 is just plain false. For John Smith IS known to be the murderer de re. After all, Jack the Ripper is known to be the murderer, and that’s just a different way of saying that John Smith is known to be the murderer. Hence John Smith is known to be the murderer after all, de re. 

So read de dicto, the premises give you a true conclusion (that the sentences are not identical) but it’s not the conclusion we are interested in. Read de re, we would get the conclusion we wanted, except that at least one premise comes out false. Hence, either way, the argument fails. 

Much the same can be said of the following argument, from Descartes: 

1. I myself cannot be doubted to exist by me. 
2. My body can be doubted to exist by me. 
3. Therefore my body and my self have different properties. One can be doubted to exist by me whereas the other cannot. 
4. Therefore, if my self is my body, then my self has different properties from itself. 
5. But everything has the same properties as itself. 
6. Therefore my self is not my body.

If the first two sentences are read de dicto, we get: 

1. I myself cannot be doubted, de dicto, to exist by me. 
2. My body can be doubted, de dicto, to exist by me.

But what is it that can and cannot be doubted in that case? The sentences “I exist” cannot be doubted if 1 is true. The sentence “my body exists” can be doubted if 2 is true.

This proves that ______ have different properties. This proves that the sentences have different properties. 

And that proves in turn that _______are non-identical. But it does not prove that ______ and ______ are non-identical. Hence the argument fails if the premises are read de dicto. And that proves in turn that the sentences are non-identical. But it does not prove that the self and the body are non-identical. Hence the argument fails if the premises are read de dicto.

What if the premises are read de re? In that case we have: 

1. I myself cannot be doubted, de re, to exist by me. 
2. My body can be doubted, de re, to exist by me.

Now the set-up is the right one if we are to prove that the self and the body are non-identical. But the first premise is now false. Why? Because the self can be doubted to exist by me under some description, and that is all that is needed to conclude that the self can be doubted to exist by me de re. 

For example, suppose that I wake up after an accident with no memory and I read about myself in the newspaper. Apparently the person I am reading about has gone missing, but I do not know it is me. I figure “That guy is probably dead.” And, since I doubt the existence of an afterlife, I conclude “Poor guy. he is probably gone. I doubt he still exists.” 

I am doubting my own existence, de re. Hence it is possible to doubt my own existence de re. 


Chapter 8 - Necessity


Review: A sentence expresses a necessary proposition if the negation of that proposition is impossible. 

If a proposition is neither necessary nor impossible we say that it is contingent.

For example, the following sentence

“Bob wore a sweater on the 3rd May 1997AD”

...expresses a proposition that is neither necessary nor impossible. Therefore the proposition is contingent. Its truth depends on the contingencies. It depends how things turn out.

When we say that a proposition is contingently true we mean that it is both true and contingent, which is to say that it is true but not necessarily true.  

When we say that a proposition is contingently false we mean that it is both false and contingent, which is to say that it is false but not impossible.  

The sentence:

“The musician John Lennon was assassinated.” 

...is true. Is it contingently true or necessarily true? It is contingently true. It might have been false, had things gone differently. 

Does the sentence 

“13 + 76 = 89” 

...express a contingently true proposition? No. It expresses a true proposition, but it is a proposition that could not have been false. It therefore expresses a necessarily true proposition, not a contingently true proposition. 

Can a necessarily true proposition ever be contingently true? No. What we mean by “contingently true” is “true but not necessarily true”. 

Can a contingently false proposition also be impossible? No. What we mean by “contingently false” is “false but not impossible”. 

Another way of saying "impossible" is "necessarily false". Hence we can say that a proposition is contingently true/false if it is true/false but not necessarily so. 

If a sentence expresses a necessarily true proposition, does that mean that it also expresses a contingently true proposition? No. If a sentence expresses a necessarily true proposition, then it definitely does not express a contingently true proposition. A proposition can only be contingently true if it is not necessarily true. A proposition can only be necessarily true if it is not contingently true. 

Can a proposition be contingently true but necessarily false? No. A contingently true proposition is true. But a necessarily false proposition is false. Nothing can be both true and false. So the answer is no. 

We say that something is actually true if and only if it is true in the actual world, the way things actually came out. 

To say that something is actually true, then, is just to say that it is true. To say that it is actually false is just to say that it is false. But it is sometimes helpful to use the word "actually" in order to emphasize this. E.g. 

"I am not saying that it is necessarily true, I am just saying that it is actually true." 
"I am not merely saying that it is possibly true. I am saying that it is actually true." 
"I am not just saying that it is possibly false. I am saying that it is actually false." 
Etc. 

Can a proposition be contingently true but actually false? 
No. A contingently true proposition is true. An actually false proposition is false. Hence a contingently true proposition is an actually true proposition.

Can an actually true proposition be contingently false? No. an actually true proposition is true. A contingently false proposition is false. No proposition can be both true and false, ergo no proposition can be actually true and contingently false. 

Does an actually true proposition have to be contingently true? No. An actually true proposition is one that is true in the actual world. All the necessarily true propositions are true in the actual world. Hence some actually true propositions are necessarily true, not contingently true. 


The philosopher and mathematician Gottfried Leibniz invented a useful device that we subsequently used for talking about possibility and necessity. Possible worlds. This way of characterizing possibility and necessity was greatly developed long after Leibniz's death, in the 20th century.

A possible world is a way the world could have been. So, for every contingent proposition there is a world in which it is true and a world in which it is false. 

There is a possible world in which Napoleon never existed. 

There is a possible world in which Socrates was not a philosopher. 

There is a possible world in which New Jersey is not a state of the union. 

Question: Is there a possible world in which Ronald Reagan did not become President of the USA?There is such a world. Ronnie Reagan might have never become President of the USA, which means there is a possible world in which he was never the President. 

Is the proposition expressed by the sentence 

“Ronnie Reagan did not become the President of the USA”

necessary, impossible, or contingent?It is contingent. It holds in some possible worlds, and does not hold in others. 

Note that by ‘possible world’ we mean ‘possible universe’. So there is a possible world in which the planet Earth is further from the sun than Mars. 

Is there a possible world in which the sun explodes into a super-nova in the year 1988?There is no contradiction in supposing that, had things gone differently, the sun might have exploded in 1988. Therefore there is a possible world in which that does occur. 

In talking about possible worlds we are not talking about actual worlds. Possible worlds are not actual, they are merely possible. (Leibniz thought of his possible worlds as being ideas in the mind of God. But we can think of them as abstract objects like numbers and sets.)

Is there a possible world in which England win the World Cup every time that it is played?There is such a possible world. 

Is there a possible world in which Manchester City dominate English football throughout the 21st century?
There is. 

For every contingent proposition, there is a possible world in which it holds and a possible world in which it does not hold. 

A necessary proposition, on the other hand, holds in all possible worlds. 

And a proposition which is necessarily false is one which is fails to hold in any possible world.

Is there a world in which the proposition expressed by the sentence 

“14+22=36”

fails to hold?There is no world where the proposition fails to hold, because the proposition is necessarily true. 

Is there a world in which the proposition expressed by the sentence 

“5+3=19”

holds?There is no such world, because that proposition is necessarily false. That’s what it means to be necessarily false; that there is no possible world in which it holds. 

Is there a world in which the sentence expressed by the proposition 

“3 camels plus 5 camels equals 8 camels”

holds?That sentence expresses a necessarily true proposition, and therefore holds in all possible worlds. So yes.

Is there a world in which the sentence expressed by the proposition 

“3 camels plus 7 camels equals 8 camels”

holds?No. That sentence expresses a necessarily false proposition, and therefore holds in no possible worlds. 

Is there a world in which the sentence expressed by the proposition 

“2 horses plus 5 camels equals 5 camels plus 2 horses”

holds?That sentence expresses a necessarily true proposition, and it therefore holds in all possible worlds. 

Review;

What is a true proposition?
A true proposition is an actual state of affairs. 

What is a false proposition? 
A false proposition is a non-actual state of affairs. 

A proposition is an actual state of affairs if it holds in this world. It is a non-actual state of affairs if it does not hold in this world. 

The proposition P holds in this world. Is it actually true or actually false?P is actually true. 

The proposition Q holds in some other possible world but not in this one. Is it actually true or actually false?It is a non-actual state of affairs, so Q is actually false. 

Sometimes we say ‘true at/in a world’ instead of ‘holds at/in a world’. Nothing important hangs on this loose usage. But when we just say something is “true” or “false” we mean that it is actually true or actually false, as opposed to true-in-some-world.

Accordingly, a good way to characterize the contingently true propositions is as follows: 

The contingently true propositions are those that are true in the actual world, but false in some other possible world. Let us call this the possible-world-theoretic definition of “contingently true”. 

Using this as a template, can you provide a possible-worlds-theoretic definition of “contingently false”? The contingently false propositions are those that are false in the actual world, but true in some other possible world. 

The contingent propositions are those propositions that are either contingently true or contingently false. We can provide a possible-worlds-theoretic definition of “contingent” by simply disjoining the definitions of “contingently true” and “contingently false”, as follows: 

The contingent propositions are those that are either true in the actual world, but false in some other possible world, or false in the actual world, but true in some other possible world. 

This is unwieldy however. So fill in the gaps to create a simpler, equivalent, definition:

The contingent propositions are those that are ___ in ___ worlds and ____ in ____.The contingent propositions are those that are true in some worlds and false in others.

Does the sentence 

“Robespierre was ultimately betrayed by the revolution he had started.” 

express a contingent proposition? Yes. You can tell that it does whether or not you know anything about Robespierre, since this is clearly something that could have been true and could have been false. 

Express the above reasoning using the notion of possible-worlds. Clearly the proposition expressed by the sentence “Robespierre was ultimately betrayed by the revolution he had started.” is one that is true in some worlds, false in others. 

If Robespierre really was betrayed by the revolution he had started, then is the sentence above contingently or necessarily true or false?It is contingently true.  

Does the sentence 

“Raids on Spanish ships by English pirates were unofficially approved of by the government of Elizabeth I”

express a contingent proposition?Yes. you can tell that it expresses the kind of proposition that can be true or false without knowing which. 

Suppose that Raids on Spanish ships by English pirates really were unofficially approved of by the government of Elizabeth I. Then the sentence from the previous frame expresses a contingently or necessarily true or false proposition?It expresses a contingently true proposition. 

Say why it is contingently true, using the possible-worlds-theoretic definition of “contingently true”. It is a proposition that is true in the actual world, but false in some other possible world. 

Does the sentence “Some squares are circular” express a contingent proposition? No. The sentence is not the kind of sentence that can be true or false. It is the kind of sentence that has to be false. It is therefore necessarily false, and not contingent.

Chapter 9 - The Essential


Now that you have the idea of what a contradiction or an impossibility is, we can see why it isn’t really as simple as all that. 

Sometimes—often—whether or not you regard a statement as expressing an impossibility depends upon what you take to be the meanings of the terms. For example;

Is the statement “Some roses are not flowers” possible? 

It depends on whether you regard being a rose as necessarily connoting being a flower. 

Earlier we said that “bananas are blue” is possible. That seems right, because an all-powerful god could have made bananas blue. But that god could not have made bananas blue if what is meant by ‘banana’ includes not being blue. 
What you take to be possible or impossible, contradictory or not, depends on what properties you take to be essential to a thing. 

Roughly, if I say that the property is yellow is essential to the banana, I am saying that if the banana hadn’t been yellow, it wouldn’t have been the banana. 

More correctly, if I say that the property is yellow is essential to the banana, I am saying that it is impossible that the banana be anything other than yellow. 

If I think that the banana could not be anything other than yellow, then I think that It is part of the banana’s essence that it is yellow. 


Suppose you think that it is essential to Abraham Lincoln that he have his original brain.  Then when Abe’s body comes out of the brain transplant with a new brain, is that Abraham Lincoln, or not Abraham Lincoln? 
Not Abraham Lincoln. He, or she, is just someone who inherited Abe’s body. 

(Many people think that if your brain were replaced in a brain transplant then you would die with the old brain. You cannot replace a brain the way that you replace a heart. Such people think that having your original brain is an essential property of you.)

We said that what you take to be possible or necessary may depend on what properties you take to be essential to a thing. 

Note that this does not mean that what really is possible or necessary depends on what you take to be essential to a thing. You may be wrong. 

Suppose you take the property of being blue to be essential to the banana, then you would take the sentence 

“Some bananas are not blue”

…to express an impossibility. However, you are probably wrong that the property of being blue is essential to the banana. And so you are probably wrong that the sentence above expresses an impossibility. Suppose you take the property of having a horn to be essential to being a rhino, but suppose you are wrong. Would you regard the following sentence as expressing an impossible proposition? 

“Some rhinos do not have horns.”
You would regard that sentence as expressing an impossible proposition. 

Would you be right?You would be wrong. Since (we supposed) it is not essential to rhinos that they have one horn, it is possible that rhinos could be such that they do not have one horn. 

Suppose that you regard it as being essential to George Bush that he take up some room. In that case would you regard the following sentence as expressing a possible proposition?

“George Bush does not take up any room.”

?
You would not regard that as expressing a possible proposition. You would regard it as expressing an impossible proposition. 

The question...

“Is having your parents an essential property of you?”

is the same question as 

“Would you have been you if you had not had your parents?”

This formulation of the question is a bit sloppy, but it is intuitive. Let’s call it the loose formulation of the question. 

What is the loose formulation of the question

“Is having your genes an essential property of you?”

?
The answer is “Would you have been you if you had not had your genes?” 

What is the loose formulation of the question

“Is sitting here reading this right now essential to you?”

?
The answer is “Would you have been you if you were not sitting reading this right now?”

Most people think that it is not essential to you that you be sitting reading this right now. If things had gone differently you wouldn’t be here reading, but you would still be you. The philosopher and mathematician Gottfried Leibniz, however, argued the opposite; If anything had gone differently in ‘your’ life, ‘you’ would not be you.

Leibniz, in other words, thought that all your properties were ________ to you. 
Leibniz thought that all your properties were essential to you. 

What is the loose formulation of the question

“Is your personality essential to you?”

?
The answer is “Would you still be you if you had not had your personality?” I.e. would it be you but with a different personality, or would it be someone else who merely looked like you and had the same parents and genes? 

Another way to ask the question “Is your personality essential to you?” is like this:

“Is it possible for you to not have your actual personality?”

We can call this the strict formulation of the question. 

What is the strict formulation of the question

“Is having your genes an essential property of you?”

?
The answer is “Is it possible for you to not have your actual genes?” 

What is the strict formulation of the question

“Is sitting here reading this right now essential to you?”
?
The answer is “Is it possible for you to not be sitting here reading this right now?”

What is the strict formulation of the question

“Is having your current brain essential to you?”

?
The answer is “Is it possible for you to not have your current brain?”

What is the strict formulation of the question 

“Are your experiences essential to you?”
The answer is “Is it possible for you to not have your actual experiences.” 

Remember this is just a stricter way of asking “Would you have been you had you not had your experiences?” which is another way of asking “Would it have been you with different experiences, or would it have been someone else with your body?” 

If “Would you have been you had you........” is the loose formulation and “Is it possible for you not.....” is the strict formulation, let us call the “Is having ....essential to you?” the normal formulation. 

For example

“Is having your current brain essential to you?”

is the normal formulation of the strict formulation...

“Is it possible for you to not have your current brain?”

and the loose formulation...

“Would you have been you had you not had your current brain?”
Your friend is groping after a concept, trying to get an idea clear. He says “What I mean is...suppose that I had a different personality, right? And I was like totally different than I am now. I mean I look the same, but it just isn’t me you know what I am saying? Like something happened to me when I was a kid and I have grown up to be like a jerk or something? My question is would that have been me? I mean really me? Or if I was that different then would it have been somebody else who just had the same genes and parents and stuff?”

Summarize the bolded question in the normal formulation. 
The answer is “Is my personality essential to me?”

The person you are speaking to is groping after a concept. She says “It seems to me that if I had had different parents then I wouldn’t look the same or be the same. I mean I know I might not look the same and I would still be me, right, like if I had plastic surgery or something, but if I had different parents that would mean I had a totally different origin, you know what I mean? I would be biologically different and genetically different and my upbringing would be different and everything. It seems to me that that wouldn’t be me... That would be somebody else.” 

This person is not asking a question, but making an assertion. So summarize his/her statement in the strict formulation. 
The answer is “It is impossible that I not have my actual parents.” 

Suppose the person you are speaking to is groping after a concept. He says “You could have had different parents and different genes and everything. That is possible. You could have had different parents and different genes and a different upbringing and even a different personality. But so long as you had your soul that would be you. Like it doesn’t really matter how your body is so long as you have the same soul—so long as, like, it is you in there—then that would be you do you see what I mean? But you have to have the same soul."

This person is making more than one statement. Summarize them in the normal formulation, and try to get them all. 
Your genes are not essential to you. 

Your upbringing is not essential to you. 

Your parents are not essential to you. 

Your personality is not essential to you. 

Your body is not essential to you. 

Your soul is essential to you. 


The first statement above looks like this in the loose formulation...

“You could still have been you even if you had not had your genes.” 

Note ‘could’ not ‘would’. Whether or not that would have been you depends—if this person is right—on whether they have the same soul. 

Put all of the other statements above into the loose formulation. 
“You could still have been you even if you had not had your upbringing.”

“You could still have been you even if you had not had your parents.”

“You could still have been you even if you had not had your personality.” 

“You could still have been you even if you had not had your body.”

“You would not have been you even if you had not had your soul.”If the property P is essential to the thing A, then the proposition expressed by the sentence 

“A has P”

is essentially true if it is true at all. For example, if the property of having size is essential to Barnum, then the proposition expressed by the sentence 

“Barnum has size”

is essentially true. Strictly speaking, it isn’t necessarily true because, had things gone differently, Barnum might not have existed. But in every world in which he exists, he has size. This is what we mean by saying that it is essentially true. 

Strictly speaking, does the sentence

“Plato was homo sapien”

express a necessarily true proposition, if it is essential to Plato that he be homo sapien?It does not express a necessarily true proposition, strictly speaking, even though it is true and even though the property is homo sapien is essential to Plato. Why not? 
Because Plato might not have existed, even though he in fact did. 

Strictly speaking, does the following sentence express an essentially true proposition?

“Martin Luther King has Martin Luther King’s soul.”

...if having Martin Luther King’s soul is essential to Martin Luther King? It does express an essentially true proposition, given the stipulations, since 

“Martin Luther King has Martin Luther King’s soul.” 

expresses a true proposition in every world in which Martin Luther King exists. 

Does the following sentence express a possible proposition?

“Charles Babbage wasn’t a genius.”

...if being a genius is essential to Charles Babbage?The sentence does not express a possible proposition in that case. Since we have stipulated that being a genius was essential to Babbage, it follows that if he wasn’t a genius he wouldn’t have existed. Which means there is no possible world in which it is true and he exists, and it is false in every world where he doesn’t exist, therefore it is false in every world.

Often, people will deliberately ignore the distinction between a proposition’s being necessarily true and its being essentially true. That’s because, most of the time, the distinction doesn’t matter. 

A good example is “the necessity of identity”. Most philosophers subscribe to the principal that goes by the name “the necessity of identity”. This says that if A is the same one thing as B, then there is no world where A and B are non-identical. 

But you might think that the name of the principle “the necessity of identity” is, strictly speaking, a bad name. Given the distinctions we have made, what would be a better name?“The essentiality of identity.”

Why would this be better? Try to get clear on this before moving to the next frame. One potential problem with suggesting that identity is necessary, which is what the title “the necessity of identity” suggests, is that it seems to suggest that if A is the same one thing as B, then it is the same one thing as B in every world, and that seems to suggest that A and B exist in every world. But A may not exist in some world, in which case it seems we must say that it is not the same one thing as anything in that world. 

And one way to avoid this problem is to avoid saying that identity is necessary, and say instead that it is essential. If A is the same one thing as B then, in every world where A exists, A is the same one thing as B. 

But even if you think that "the essentiality of identity" is a better name for the phenomenon than “the necessity of identity”, no harm is done if we think of it purely as a name as opposed to a description. (In that case it may as well be called Roger.) 

What about the characterization of the law that we gave earlier? Was that a bad characterization? (here it is again...)

if A is the same one thing as B, then there is no world where A and B are non-identical.

What should we say about that? Is it false? No it is not false. It says that if A and B are identical, then there is no world where they are non-identical. That holds necessarily. For: 

In the worlds where A exists, A is the same one thing as B, because identity is essential. Hence these are not worlds where A and B are non-identical. 

In the worlds where A does not exist, neither does B, since if B did, A would. Hence these are not worlds where A and B are non-identical either. 

Hence there are no worlds where A and B are non-identical. 

So another more accurate name for “the necessity of identity” would be the “necessary not-not-identicality of identicals”. But that is ugly. Chapter 9 - The Analytic


A proposition can only be essentially true if it is true. 

Does the sentence

“One horned horses have one horn”

express an essentially true proposition?It does not express an essentially true proposition because it does not express a true proposition. Arguments like the following... 

If a thing has one horn then it exists. One-horned horses, by definition, have one horn. Therefore one-horned horses exist. 

...fail because the second premise - 

“One-horned horses, by definition, have one horn”

is false. 

Be wary of arguments that proceed ‘by definition’. They can be very seductive, but they may not work if the object being defined does not exist. 

Does the following sentence express an essentially true proposition? 

“One winged monkeys, by definition, have one wing.”

?No. It is not essentially true because it is not true at all. There are no one winged monkeys. 

Some sentences could easily be confused with sentences which express essentially true propositions. For example the following, suppose there is a man in the corner wearing a hat. In that case... 

“The man in the corner wearing the hat is wearing a hat.”

...would say something true. But it would not be essentially true, since it is not essential to the man in the corner wearing a hat that he be wearing a hat. That person would survive the loss of his hat! Had he not worn it, he would still have existed. 
Is it essential to the dog with the bright red collar that he have a bright red collar?It is not essential to the dog with the bright red collar that he have a bright red collar. If it had not had such a collar it would still have been itself. 

Does the sentence...

“The mare that eats oats eat oats”

...express an essentially true proposition?Not unless it is essential to the mare that eats oats that it eat oats. On most views, it might not have eaten oats (even though it in fact did), so, on most views, no. 

If an essentially true proposition has a subject which exists in all possible worlds, then it is a necessarily true sentence. 

e.g. the sentence

“Bush has his own mind”

...expresses an essentially true proposition (on the assumption that Bush could not possibly exist without his mind) but not a necessary proposition because Bush might not exist. However the sentence...

“Four is an even number.”

....expresses a necessary sentence because it is essential to the number four that it be even, and it doesn’t make much sense to speak of that number not existing in some other possible world. 

Does the following sentence express a necessary proposition?

“Seven is a prime number.”Yes. That expresses a necessary proposition because seven is essentially prime, and it exists everywhere in the “multiverse”, i.e. in the set of all possible worlds. Sentences like 

“The clown with the balloon is a clown”

do not express essentially true propositions. And they do not express necessary propositions. 

Nevertheless these sentences cannot fail to pick out true propositions if the objects of the sentence exists. 

For example

“The red bike is red.”

picks out an object by using the fact that it is red. It then says of that object that it is red. The only way that this can be false is if there is no red bike. 

How can the following sentence be false?

“The blue hornet is blue.”

?It can only be false if there is no blue hornet. Why?Because it picks out a thing by saying that it is blue, hence if it picks anything out at all it will pick out a blue thing. But the sentence says of the thing that it picks out that it is blue. Hence if it picks anything out at all, the sentence will be true. 

There are in fact no blue hornets. With that in mind, is the property of being blue essential to the blue hornet?No. It is not the case that the blue hornet has any essential properties. It doesn’t exist.  

Would the property of being blue be essential to the blue hornet, if it existed?
No. The blue hornet might get covered in paint, but it would still be the same one thing. 

How can the following sentence be false?

“The blue hornet is a hornet.”

?It can only be false if there is no blue hornet. Why?Because it picks out a thing by saying that it is a (blue) hornet, and then says of it that it is a hornet. So if it picks anything out at all it will be true. 

If you mean by ‘unicorn’ ‘horse with a horn’ then you might be inclined to suppose that the sentence...

“Unicorns have one horn”

...is true. However it is not true because there are no unicorns. 

Nonetheless, since ‘unicorn’ means ‘horse with one horn’ then, if there were unicorns it is true that they would have one horn. 

How can the following sentence be false?

“The horse with one horn has one horn?”

?It can only be false if there is no horse with one horn. Why?Because it picks out a thing by saying that it has one horn, and then says of it that it has one horn. If it picks anything out at all it will be a thing with one horn. So it would be true. 

Does the sentence...

“The horse with one horn has one horn”

...express a necessary proposition?It does not express a necessary proposition. Why not?Because there might not even be a horse with one horn. 

What if there is a horse with one horn? In that case does the sentence 

“The horse with one horn has one horn”

express a necessary proposition?It does not express a necessary proposition. Why not?Because even though the horse with one horn exists and has one horn, it might not have existed. It’s actual existence does not change the fact that it might not have existed. 

Suppose that the horse with one horn is called Raymond. And suppose that Raymond has necessary existence. That’s to say, Raymond exists, in some shape or form, in every possible world (just suppose!) In that case does the sentence...

“The horse with one horn has one horn”

...express a necessary proposition?No. Even if Raymond exists in every world, Raymond’s one horn is probably not essential to it. It would still have existed if it had not had one horn. It would still have existed even if its horn was cut off, and even in those worlds where it never grew. 

Is it essential to the man with the bag that he have a bag?It is not essential to him. he would still be himself even if he didn’t have a bag. 

Is it essential to the bacon I saw in the fridge that it be in the fridge?No it is not. The bacon would still have been the bacon even if it hadn’t been in the fridge. 

Is it essential to the President that he Preside?It is not essential to the President that he Preside. He might easily have not been the President. 

“The man with the hat is, by definition, a man.”

Could this possibly be false? I.e. is there any possibility that it is false in the actual world ?Yes. But how might it turn out false in the actual world? If the man with the hat does not exist. If he exists then of course - by definition - he has a hat and he is a man. 

Here is another trick...

Suppose I indicate a man in the corner wearing a hat and I say the following: 

“The man with the hat, by definition, wears a hat. But if, by definition, he wears a hat, then he can never take the hat off.”

Try to say to yourself as clearly as possible what is wrong with this argument before moving to the next frame. It is confusing two things...

1. The fact that the man has been picked out using the expression “the man with the hat” 

and

2. The idea that the property of having a hat is essential to the man. 

Just because we pick someone out by using a certain property does not mean that the property is essential. 

Is the property of being an old woman in the corner smoking a cigar essential to the person picked out by the expression “that old woman in the corner smoking a cigar”?That property is not essential to the old woman in the corner. It is just the property used to pick her out, but that doesn’t make it an essential property. 

Could the following possibly be false?

“Goblins are by definition little green men.”

?It is false if there are no goblins. 

The following sentence is one that you might be tempted to believe; but is there any way that it could be false?

“The largest dog in the world is by definition larger than all the other dogs.”Of course it could be false. What if there is no largest dog in the world? What if two dogs are tied? What if there are no dogs? In such cases there would be no largest dog. 

Is there any way that the following could be false?

“The cleverest woman in the world is by definition cleverer than all the other women.”

?Of course it could be false. What if there is no cleverest woman in the world? What if two women are tied? What if there are no women? In such cases there would be no cleverest woman. 

Is there any way that the following could be false?

“The tallest man in the world is by definition taller than all the other men.”Of course it could be false. What if there is no tallest man in the world? What if two men are tied? What if there are no men? In such cases there would be no tallest man. 


The sentences in the last few sections were almost true purely by definition. Sentences like “The smartest man in the world is smarter than all other men.” looks to be the kind of sentence that has to be true, given its meaning. Of course, that’s not quite right because the subject may have no unique referent. The subject may not exist, or there may not be a unique smartest man, in which case the statement is false. 

However, it was close. By modifying such sentences slightly, we can produce sentences that are true “by definition” or - better - true in virtue of what the terms mean. 

Philosophers say that sentences that are guaranteed to express truths because of the way the terms in those sentences are defined are analytically true. “Analytically true” means “true by definition”. 

For example: 

“All bachelors are unmarried men.” 

is true by definition. It is therefore analytically true. 

Question, is the statement “the tallest man in the world is taller than all the other men” analytically true, strictly speaking? No. Strictly speaking, it is not analytically true because it is not guaranteed to be true given the meaning of the terms. It is pretty close. 

Why is it not analytically true when speaking strictly? Because the tallest man in the world might not exist, in which case the statement is false. Since there is no guarantee, just from the meaning of the terms, that there is such a man, there is no guarantee, just from the meaning of the terms, that the statement is true. 

Similarly, is the sentence: 

“The doctor down the street who specializes in ophthalmology is a doctor.” 

analytically true, strictly speaking? 

No it is not analytically true because there may be no such doctor. But it is close. What about: 

“Doctors that specialize in ophthalmology are doctors.” 

?Again this is not analytically true because, without changing the meanings of the terms, we can make it false - just by imagining ourselves in a world where there are no doctors. Since it would be false in that world, but since its meaning would be the same, it cannot be true purely thanks to its meaning. It is relying for its truth on the world being a certain way. 
 
However, it is close to being analytically true. 

Many sentences that are close to being analytically true can be used to produce sentences that are analytically true just via the application of a quick trick. 

Recall that: 

“Goblins are small and green.” is false 

whereas

“All goblins are small and green.” is true.

We can take advantage of this phenomenon to produce an analytically true sentence from our last contender: “Doctors that specialize in ophthalmology are doctors.” Try to guess what the trick is, and apply it.  The trick is to universally generalize over the entities to which the subject term purports to refer. In other words, the trick is to add “all”. 

“All doctors that specialize in ophthalmology are doctors.”

This means the same as: 

“There are no doctors who specialize in ophthalmology that are not doctors.” 

Now the sentence expresses a truth in whichever world it is uttered. For in those worlds where there are no doctors, the sentence comes out true because, clearly, if there are no doctors at all, then there are no doctors who specialize in ophthalmology that are not doctors. On the other hand, if there are doctors, there won’t be any that specialize in ophthalmology that are not doctors. Hence, again, the meaning of the terms works in such a way that the sentence expresses a truth.

It is not an interesting or informative sentence, but it is one that is guaranteed to express a truth.  
 
Use the same trick to produce an analytically true sentence from the statement below: 

“Ducks that lay eggs lay eggs.” “All ducks that lay eggs lay eggs.” 

Why is this guaranteed to express a truth, where “Ducks that lay eggs lay eggs.” is not? 

Because the sentence “Ducks that lay eggs lay eggs” is false in worlds where_________. If the ducks that lay eggs don’t _____ then they don’t do anything. 

But the sentence “All ducks that lay eggs lay eggs” means the same as “____________ ducks that lay eggs that do not lay eggs.”  In any world where there are no ducks that lay eggs, this comes out true. And in any world where there are ducks that lay eggs, this also comes out true.  

Fill in the gaps in the answer before proceeding. 

Because the sentence “Ducks that lay eggs lay eggs” is false in worlds where there are no ducks that lay eggs. If the ducks that lay eggs don’t exist then they don’t do anything.

But the sentence “All ducks that lay eggs lay eggs” means the same as “There are no ducks that lay eggs that do not lay eggs.”  In any world where there are no ducks that lay eggs, this comes out true. And in any world where there are ducks that lay eggs, this also comes out true. 

Use the trick again to turn the following sentence into an analytic truth: 

“Bachelors are unmarried men.” The trick is to add “all”. “All bachelors are unmarried men.” 

Why is this guaranteed to express a truth, where “Bachelors are unmarried men.” is not? 

Because the sentence “Bachelors are unmarried men” is false in worlds where_________. If the bachelors don’t _____ then they don’t do anything. 

But the sentence “All bachelors are unmarried men” means the same as “____________ bachelors that ____________.”  In any world where there are no bachelors, this comes out true. And in any world where there are bachelors, this also comes out true.  

Because the sentence “Bachelors are unmarried men” is false in worlds where there are no bachelors. If the bachelors don’t exist then they don’t do anything. 

But the sentence “All bachelors are unmarried men” means the same as “There are no bachelors that are not unmarried men.”  In any world where there are no bachelors, this comes out true. And in any world where there are bachelors, this also comes out true. 

Use the same trick again to convert the sentence

“Good acrobats have skills in acrobatics.” 

into an analytic truth. The trick is to add “all”. “All good acrobats have skills in acrobatics.” 

Why is this guaranteed to express a truth, where “Good acrobats have skills in acrobatics.” is not? 

Because the sentence “Good acrobats have skills in acrobatics” is _____ in worlds where_________. If the ______ don’t _____ then they don’t do anything. 

But the sentence “All good acrobats have skills in acrobatics” means the same as “____________________________________.”  In any world where there are no good acrobats, this comes out true. And in any world where there are good acrobats, this also comes out true. Because the sentence “Good acrobats have skills in acrobatics” is false in worlds where there are no acrobats. If the acrobats don’t exist then they don’t do anything. 

But the sentence “All good acrobats have skills in acrobatics” means the same as “There are no good acrobats that do not have skills in acrobatics.” In any world where there are no good acrobats, this comes out true. And in any world where there are good acrobats, this also comes out true.

If a statement is analytically true, is it guaranteed to be true? Yes. If it is analytically true, then it is true by definition, and therefore guaranteed to be true. 

If a statement is guaranteed to be true, is that the same as it expressing a necessarily true proposition? No. A statement may be guaranteed to be true without expressing a necessary state of affairs. For example, take the statement: 

“I am here.” 

Whenever or wherever you utter this statement, it is guaranteed to express a true proposition. But the proposition itself will not be necessarily true. For example, if I utter the above in San Francisco, then it says that I am in San Francisco, but that is not a necessarily true state of affairs. 

Does the statement

“I exist”

express (a) a necessarily true proposition or (b) a proposition that’s guaranteed to be true?The answer is (b). “I exist”, whenever it is uttered, thought or believed, is guaranteed to express a true proposition, since you would have to exist in order to make the utterance, or have the thought or belief. But the true proposition is not a necessary truth, since there are many worlds where you do not exist.

Does the statement

“Something is currently expressing a proposition.”

express (a) a necessarily true proposition or (b) a proposition that’s guaranteed to be true whenever it is uttered? The answer is (b). “Something is currently expressing a proposition.”, whenever it is uttered, is guaranteed to express a true proposition, since the utterance, in expressing a proposition, would thereby make itself true. But the true proposition is not a necessary truth, since there are many worlds where no utterances are made. Indeed there are worlds where there is no life, and nothing that could make an utterance. 

Does the statement

“Someone is a believer.”

express (a) a necessarily true proposition or (b) a proposition that’s guaranteed to be true whenever it is believed? The answer is (b). Why? “Someone is a believer.”, whenever it is believed, is guaranteed to express a true proposition, since the person who believes it thereby makes it true. But the true proposition is not a necessary truth, since there are many worlds where there are no believers.

Does the statement

“There is at least enough language in the world to be able to say what I am now saying.”

express (a) a proposition that is guaranteed to be true whenever the sentence is said or (b) a necessarily true proposition?The answer is (a). Why? “There is at least enough language in the world to be able to say what I am now saying.”, whenever it is said, is guaranteed to express a true proposition, since the person who says it thereby makes it true. But the true proposition is not a necessary truth, since there are many possible worlds where there are no languages of any sort.

We learned earlier that an analytically true statement is one that, by definition, is guaranteed to express a truth. In other words, it is one that is guaranteed to express a truth given the meaning of its terms. 

Question: Does that mean it expresses a necessary truth? Answer: No. All that we know is that analytic statements are (thanks to the meaning of the terms) guaranteed to be true. But we have seen several examples where a statement is guaranteed to be true even though it does not express a necessary truth. 

This can be a bit puzzling, since analytic truths come out true in whichever world you happen to be. But they do not always express a necessary truth. 

They are like “I exist”. It does not matter which world you are in when you utter this, it is guaranteed to be true. However, just because it is guaranteed to be true in the world where you utter it, doesn’t mean it expresses a sentence that is true in all worlds. There are many worlds where yo do not exist, even though the utterance is guaranteed to be true in whichever world you utter it. 

Analytic statements are like that, though it is more tricky to show it. Take the sentence: 

“All bachelors are unmarried men.” 

We have seen that this is an analytically true proposition. But does it express a necessarily true proposition? your first instinct might be to say “yes” since in every world where bachelors do not exist, it comes out true, and in every world where bachelors do not exist, it comes out true. 

However, let’s consider “the” proposition that it expresses. 

Firstly, recall that propositions are states of affairs. 

Next, note that in the world where Larry, Curly and Mo are the only bachelors, the statement “All bachelors are unmarried men” expresses the state of affairs in which Larry is an unmarried man, Curly is an unmarried man and Mo is an unmarried man. 
Hence the state of affairs expressed by the sentence “All bachelors are unmarried men” is the same state of affairs expressed by the sentence “Larry is an unmarried man, Curly is an unmarried man and Mo is an unmarried man” in the world where Larry, Curly and Mo are all the bachelors. 

But in the world where Porthos, Athos and Aramis are all the bachelors, the same sentence “All bachelors are unmarried men” expresses a different state of affairs: It is that state of affairs also expressed by the sentence “Porthos is an unmarried man, Athos is an unmarried man and Aramis is an unmarried man.” This follows via the same reasoning used above. 

So the sentence “All bachelors are unmarried men” expresses different states of affairs - different propositions - in different contexts.We can find the proposition that a universally quantified statement expresses by finding the corresponding conjunction for the sentence. For example, in the context where Larry, Curly and Mo are the only good acrobats, what is the corresponding conjunction for the statement “All good acrobats have skills in acrobatics?” “Larry has skills in acrobatics and Curly has skills in acrobatics and Mo has skills in acrobatics.” 

So what is the state of affairs expressed by the sentence “All good acrobats have skillls in acrobatics? in that context?  It is the state of affairs wherein Larry has skills in acrobatics and Curly has skills in acrobatics and Mo has skills in acrobatics.

That’s the proposition that the sentence “All the good acrobats have skills in acrobatics” expresses In the context wherein Larry, Curly and Mo constitute the totality of good acrobats. But in the context wherein Porthos, Athos and Aramis are all the good acrobats, does the same sentence express the same proposition or a different proposition? It expresses a different proposition. What proposition does it express? It expresses the same proposition, or state of affairs, also expressed by the sentence “Porthos has skills in acrobatics, Athos has skills in acrobatics and Aramis has skills in acrobatics.” 

Is the proposition expressed by the sentence above a necessarily true proposition? No. The proposition expressed by “Porthos has skills in acrobatics, Athos has skills in acrobatics and Aramis has skills in acrobatics.” is one that is true in some possible worlds, false in others. It is false wherever one of those individuals fails to have skills in acrobatics. 

If, in the context in question, the sentence “All good acrobats have skills in acrobatics” expresses the same proposition as “Porthos has skills in acrobatics, Athos has skills in acrobatics and Aramis has skills in acrobatics.” then does the sentence “All good acrobats have skills in acrobatics” express a necessarily true proposition? No. Since, in the context in question, the sentence “All good acrobats have skills in acrobatics” expresses the same proposition as “Porthos has skills in acrobatics, Athos has skills in acrobatics and Aramis has skills in acrobatics.” and since the latter does not express a necessarily true proposition, the former cannot express a necessarily true proposition either. 

Since the sentence “All good acrobats have skills in acrobatics” is an analytically true sentence, we now have an example of an analytically true sentence that does not express a necessarily true proposition. In the context where Larry, Curly and Mo are the only active pheasant pluckers, what is the corresponding conjunction for the statement “All active pheasant pluckers pluck pheasants?” “Larry plucks pheasants and Curly plucks pheasants and Mo plucks pheasants.” 

So what is the state of affairs expressed by the sentence “All active pheasant pluckers pluck pheasants?” in that context?  It is the state of affairs wherein Larry plucks pheasants and Curly plucks pheasants and Mo plucks pheasants.

That’s the proposition that the sentence “All active pheasant pluckers pluck pheasants” expresses In the context wherein Larry, Curly and Mo constitute the totality of active pheasant pluckers. But in the context wherein Porthos, Athos, Aramis and d’Artagnan are all the active pheasant pluckers, does the same sentence express the same proposition or a different proposition? It expresses a different proposition. What proposition does it express? It expresses the same proposition, or state of affairs, also expressed by the sentence “Porthos plucks pheasants, Athos plucks pheasants, Aramis plucks pheasants and d’Artagnan plucks pheasants.” 

Is the proposition expressed by the sentence “Porthos plucks pheasants, Athos plucks pheasants, Aramis plucks pheasants and d’Artagnan plucks pheasants.” necessarily true? No. The sentence expressed by “Porthos plucks pheasants, Athos plucks pheasants, Aramis plucks pheasants and d’Artagnan plucks pheasants.” is false in some worlds, i.e. in those worlds where at least one of those individuals either fails to exist or fails to pluck pheasants. 

If, in the context in question, the sentence “All active pheasant pluckers pluck pheasants” expresses the same proposition as “Porthos plucks pheasants, Athos plucks pheasants, Aramis plucks pheasants and d’Artagnan plucks pheasants.” then does the sentence “All active pheasant pluckers pluck pheasants” express a necessarily true proposition? No. Since, in the context in question, the sentence “All active pheasant pluckers pluck pheasants” expresses the same proposition (state of affairs) as “Porthos plucks pheasants, Athos plucks pheasants, Aramis plucks pheasants and d’Artagnan plucks pheasants” and since the latter does not express a necessarily true proposition, the former cannot express a necessarily true proposition either. 

Since the sentence “All active pheasant pluckers pluck pheasants” is an analytically true sentence, we again have an example of an analytically true sentence that does not express a necessarily true proposition. 

The key insights here can be laid out as follows: 

It is sentences that are analytically true (or not), not propositions. To think of propositions as analytically true or false is a category error. 

An analytically true sentence is a sentence that, thanks to its meaning, is guaranteed to express a true proposition. 

But an analytically true sentence can do that by expressing a different proposition in every context. So long as, thanks to its meaning, it always expresses a true proposition - even if it’s always a different one - the sentence thereby gets to be analytically true. 

But that leaves open the possibility that the propositions expressed are not necessarily true. The analytically true sentence can come out true in every world thanks to it expressing a different proposition in each context, not thanks to it expressing a single state of affairs that always obtains. 
Chapter 10 - Necessity De Dicto and De Re


This section covers a curious fact about the way sentences express propositions. Eventually, we will come to distinguish what philosophers call a “de re” and a “de dicto” sense in which sentences express propositions. In doing so, we will immunize ourselves against a mass of potential confusions that occur when we consider hard problems of any sort.  

Recall that a necessarily true proposition is one that is true in all possible worlds. A contingent proposition, on the other hand, is one that is true in some possible worlds but _____ in others.A contingent proposition, on the other hand, is one that is true in some possible worlds but false in others.

We start by asking whether the following sentence expresses a necessary or a contingent proposition. 

“The number of planets in the solar system is greater than the number of members of the Beatles when they split up.”

What do you think? Is it necessary or contingent? 
Intuitively, one would naturally say that it expresses a contingent proposition. After all, the number of planets might have been different. The number of Beatles might have been different. And the sentence would express a falsehood in those possible worlds where the number of Beatles was greater than the number of planets. 

However, as appealing as this reasoning is, it is, technically speaking, mistaken. 

Notice that each part of the sentence refers to a number. 

“The number of planets in the solar system is greater than the number of members of the Beatles when they split up.”

The first part of the sentence refers to the number eight while the second refers to the number four. So the sentence expresses the proposition: 

8 > 4

…and this is a necessary proposition. It is true in all possibilities. The reason this is confusing is because it is easy to conflate the following:

1. A sentence that necessarily expresses a true proposition

with

2. A sentence that expresses a necessarily true proposition

In expressing the proposition 8 > 4 the sentence on the previous page expresses a necessarily true proposition. However, had the world gone differently the same sentence might have expressed a different proposition, one that was false. 

For example, had there been only three planets, and five Beatles, then the sentence “The number of planets in the solar system is greater than the number of members of the Beatles when they split up.” would express the proposition 3 > 5, which is false. 

 

At first, it might seem very hard to tell the difference between 1 and 2. For now, just note that there is a difference in the order of words used in the two sentences. 

Complete the following by placing either “true proposition” or “expresses” into the gap: 

In 1, the word “necessarily” modifies the word “___________”. So in 1, it is what the sentence expresses that cannot vary from world to world. In 2, however, the word “necessarily” modifies the word “___________”. That means that it is the truth of the proposition that is necessary.

In 1, the word “necessarily” modifies the word “expresses”. So in 1, it is what the sentence expresses that cannot vary from world to world. In 2, however, the word “necessarily” modifies the word “true”. That means that it is the truth of the proposition that is necessary.

Does the sentence “The number of sides of a triangle is smaller than the number of Beatles there were when they split up” express a contingently true or a necessarily true proposition? 

It expresses a necessarily true proposition.  

That’s because the expressions “the number of sides of a triangle” and “the number of Beatles when they split up” refer, respectively, to what? They pick out, respectively, the numbers 3 and 4. 

Given that reading, what necessarily true proposition is expressed by the sentence? The proposition expressed is the proposition also expressed by the sentence 

“3 is smaller than 4. “

Why is that sentence necessarily true? Express your answer in terms of possible worlds. 
Because there is no possible world where 3 is not smaller than 4. 

Does the following sentence express a contingently true proposition or a necessarily true proposition? 

“The number of sides of a triangle is greater than the number of Presidents named George Washington.” 

?That sentence expresses a necessarily true proposition.

That’s because the expressions “the number of sides of triangle” and “the number of Presidents named George Washington” pick out what? They pick out the numbers 3 and 1 respectively.

Consequently, what necessarily true proposition does the statement express? It expresses the proposition also expressed by the sentence “3 is greater than 1”.

Why is that sentence necessarily true? Express your answer in terms of possible worlds.Because there is no possible world where 3 is not larger than 1. 

Does the following sentence express a contingently or necessarily true proposition? 

“The shape of the sun is not identical to the shape of a standard box.”

?It expresses a necessarily true proposition. 

That’s because the expressions “the shape of the sun” and “the shape of a standard box” refer to what? They pick out the spherical shape and the cubical shape respectively. 

Consequently, what necessarily true proposition does the sentence “The shape of the sun is not identical to the shape of a standard box.” express?

It expresses the proposition also expressed by the statement “The sphere shape is not the same as the cube shape.” 

That is necessarily true. But why? Express your answer in terms of possible worlds. 

Because there is no possible world where the sphere shape and the cube shape are the same. 

Does the following sentence express a contingently or necessarily true or false proposition?

“The number of days in a week is smaller than the number of hours in a day.” 

?It expresses a necessarily true proposition. 
 
That’s because the expressions “the number of days in a week” and “the number of hours in a day” pick out what? They pick out, respectively, the number seven and the number twenty-four. 

Consequently, what is the necessary proposition expressed by the statement in this case? It is the proposition also expressed by the statement “Seven is smaller than twenty four.” 

Why is that sentence necessarily true? Express your answer in terms of possible worlds.Because there is no world where seven is not smaller than twenty four. 

Does the following sentence express a contingently true, contingently false, necessarily true or necessarily false proposition?

“The number of Beatles at the time they split up is not identical to the square root of 16.” 

?That sentence expresses a necessarily false proposition. 
 
That’s because the expressions “the number of Beatles at the time they split up” and “the square root of 16” pick out what? They both pick out the number 4. 

Consequently, what proposition does the sentence express, on this reading? It expresses the same proposition also expressed by the sentence “4 is not identical to 4.” Why is that sentence necessarily false? Express your answer in terms of possible worlds. 

Because there is no world where 4 is not identical to 4. Hence the proposition is necessarily false. 

Now that we have seen that these sentences express necessary truths, we are in a position to explain why they seem to express contingent truths. 

It is because they pick out different sentences in different worlds. 

Take the sentence: 

“The number of planets is even.” 

This sentence expresses a necessary truth. It is the necessary truth also expressed by: 

“8 is even.” 

However, in a world where there were 9 planets, the same sentence would express a different proposition. Which proposition would it express? “9 is even.” 

Is the proposition expressed by this sentence necessarily true, necessarily false contingently true or contingently false? It is necessarily false. There is no possible world where 9 is even. 

Hence what is the right way to talk about the sentence: 

“The number of planets is even.” 

?

(a) We must say that it expresses a contingently true proposition. 

OR

(b) We must say that it expresses a necessarily false proposition in some worlds, and a necessarily true proposition in others. Clearly the answer is (b). We must say that it expresses a necessarily false proposition in some worlds, and a necessarily true proposition in others.

Given that the sentence expresses a necessarily true proposition in the actual world, but not in some other world, we must say that: 

The sentence _________ expresses a necessarily true proposition. The sentence contingently expresses a necessarily true proposition. In some worlds, where the number of planets is different, the expression “the number of planets” picks out something other than 8, and so the proposition expressed is something other than “8 is even”. 

If the sentence expressed a contingently true proposition in the actual world, but it expressed a necessarily true proposition in other worlds, we would say that it ________ expressed a contingently true proposition. 

If the sentence expressed a contingently true proposition in the actual world, but it expressed a necessarily true proposition in other worlds, we would say that it contingently expressed a contingently true proposition.

If the sentence expressed a contingently true proposition in every possible world, we would say that it ___________ expressed a ___________ proposition. 


If the sentence expressed a contingently true proposition in every possible world, we would say that it necessarily expressed a contingently true proposition.

If the sentence expressed a necessarily true proposition in every possible world, we would say that it ___________ expressed a ___________ proposition.

If the sentence expressed a contingently true proposition in every possible world, we would say that it necessarily expressed a necessarily true proposition.

If the sentence expressed a necessarily true proposition in the actual world, but expressed a contingently true proposition in other possible worlds, we would say that it ___________ expressed a ___________ proposition.

If the sentence expressed a necessarily true proposition in the actual world, but expressed a contingently true proposition in other possible worlds, we would say that it contingently expressed a necessarily true proposition.

If the sentence expressed a necessarily true proposition in the actual world, but expressed a necessarily false proposition in other possible worlds, we would say that it ___________ expressed a ___________ true proposition.

If the sentence expressed a necessarily true proposition in the actual world, but expressed a necessarily false proposition in other possible worlds, we would say that it contingently expressed a necessarily true proposition.

If the sentence expressed a necessarily false proposition in the actual world, but expressed a contingently true proposition in other possible worlds, we would say that it ___________ expressed a ___________ proposition.

If the sentence expressed a necessarily false proposition in the actual world, but expressed a contingently true proposition in other possible worlds, we would say that it contingently expressed a necessarily false proposition.

We have seen examples of sentences that express necessarily true propositions. We have not yet seen examples of where sentences necessarily express true propositions. 

A good example is the sentence “I exist”. Whenever it is uttered, it is guaranteed to express a truth. E.g. when Descartes utters it, it expresses the proposition that Descartes exists. And that must be true, or else he would not be around to utter it! 

But Descartes’ existence is a contingent state of affairs. Had things gone differently, Descartes would not have existed. 

Hence the utterance “I exist” necessarily expresses a true proposition. 

Suppose that “I exist” is uttered by Leibniz. What proposition does it express? It expresses the proposition that Leibniz exists. Is it true at the time of utterance? Of course. If Leibniz says “I exist” then he must exist in order to say it. Hence it expresses a true proposition. 

Does it express a necessarily true proposition? No. Had history gone differently, Leibniz might never have existed. Leibniz did not have to exist. 

When Leibniz says “I exist”, does that express the same proposition as when Hume says “I exist”? No. When Leibniz says “I exist” that expresses the proposition that Leibniz exists. But when Hume says “I exist”, that expresses the proposition that Hume exists.  

When Hume says “I exist”, is it true at the time of utterance? Of course. If Hume says “I exist” then he must exist in order to say it. Hence it expresses a true proposition. 

Does it express a necessarily true proposition? No. Had history gone differently, Hume might never have existed. Hume did not have to exist.

Consider the following graph: 
The graph illustrates how the sentence “I exist” always expresses a contingent truth, but it expresses a different contingent truth when uttered by different speakers. So which of the following is true? 
 
(a) “I exist” contingently expresses a necessarily true proposition. 
(b) “I exist” necessarily expresses a contingently true proposition. The answer is (b) “I exist” necessarily expresses a contingently true proposition. 

The proposition expressed is only contingently true, not necessarily true. That’s because the proposition expressed is one that, in some circumstances, can be false. E.g. when uttered by Zhang, the sentence “I exist” expresses the proposition that ____ exists, which is not something that is true in every world. E.g. it is false in worlds where Zhang was never born. E.g. when uttered by Zhang, the sentence “I exist” expresses the proposition that Zhang exists, which is not something that is true in every world. E.g. it is false in worlds where Zhang was never born.



Philosophers have, since medieval times, distinguished between the de re and the de dicto reading of necessity. Our work so far allows us to make this distinction clear. 

“De re” means “of the real”. Sometimes we say “of the thing” or “of the state of affairs itself”. “De dicto” means “of the words”. 

Necessity de dicto  = necessity of the words, of the expression. This is where the words necessarily express a true proposition. 

Necessity de re  = necessity of the thing expressed. This is where the situation the words describe is a situation that could not be otherwise.

In other words…

When we say that a sentence is necessarily true de dicto, that means that it necessarily expresses a true proposition. 

When we say that a sentence is necessarily true de re, that means that the sentence expresses a necessarily true proposition. 

Question: Based upon this, when we say that a sentence is contingently true de re, what do we mean? 

We mean that the sentence expresses a _________ true proposition. (as opposed to __________ expressing a true proposition).We mean that the sentence expresses a contingently true proposition. (as opposed to contingently expressing a true proposition). 

When we say that the sentence is contingently true de dicto, what do we mean? 

We mean that _____________________________________ (as opposed to ______________________________).We mean that it contingently expresses a true proposition (as opposed to expressing a contingently true proposition). 

When we say that a sentence is necessarily false de re, what do we mean? We mean that it expresses a necessarily false proposition (as opposed to necessarily expressing a false proposition).

When we say that a sentence is contingently false de re, what do we mean? We mean that it expresses a contingently false proposition (as opposed to contingently expressing a false proposition.) 

When we say that a sentence is necessarily false de dicto, what do we mean? We mean that it necessarily expresses a false proposition (as opposed to expressing a necessarily false proposition).  

When we say that a sentence is contingently false de dicto, what do we mean? We mean that it contingently expresses a false proposition (as opposed to expressing a contingently false proposition).  

Suppose Descartes thinks the following to himself: 

“I exist.” 

What should we say about this thought? 

(a) The thought is necessarily true de dicto? 
(b) The thought is necessarily true de re?

(a) The thought is necessarily true de dicto. 

That’s because the thought necessarily expresses a true proposition. There is no way that that thought, given that it is thought at all, could fail to express a true state of affairs, since it could only be thought by someone who exists. 

However, it does not express a necessarily true proposition. Why not? 

Because ________ does not exist in all _______ ______.Because Descartes does not exist in all possible worlds. Hence the proposition that Descartes exists is not one that is necessarily true. 

Consider the following sentence 

“The tallest woman in the world is taller than any other woman.” 

What should we say about this sentence? 

(a) The sentence is necessarily true de dicto? 
(b) The sentence is necessarily true de re?

(a) The sentence is necessarily true de dicto 

That’s because the statement ________ expresses a true __________, but does not express a __________ true proposition. That’s because the statement necessarily expresses a true proposition, but does not express a necessarily true proposition.

That’s because, in the world where Smith is the world’s tallest woman, the sentence says that Smith is taller than all other women, and this is true. 

And in the world where Jones is the world’s tallest woman, the sentence says that Jones is taller than all other women. And this is true. 

And in the world where Ng is the world’s tallest woman, the sentence says that __ is taller than all other women. And this is true. And in the world where Ng is the world’s tallest woman, the sentence says that Ng is taller than all other women. And this is true. 

So the sentence expresses different propositions in different contexts, but the proposition it expresses is always bound to come out ____. So the sentence expresses different propositions in different contexts, but the proposition it expresses is always bound to come out true. 

Since it necessarily expresses a true proposition, we say it is de ____ necessary. Since it necessarily expresses a true proposition, we say it is de dicto necessary. 

Which of the two definitions (Y) or (Z) is the correct definition of (A)? Which is the correct definition of (B)? 



(A) A de dicto necessity. 

(B) A de re necessity. 



(Y) a necessity where the words have the special property of always expressing some truth. 

(Z) a necessity where the situation described has the special property that things could not be otherwise.  (A) matches (Y) and (B) matches (Z). 

If there is no man in the corner, the following sentence fails to express any proposition. 

“The man standing in the corner is standing in the corner.” 

But if it expresses a proposition at all, that proposition must be true. 

Accordingly, is the sentence necessarily true de dicto or necessarily true de re? 
It is necessarily true de dicto. The words have to come out true, if they succeed in expressing anything at all.  

It is not necessarily true de re because, though the words must express a truth, the situation described is one that could be otherwise. Had things gone differently, the man in the corner could have been standing somewhere else. 

Is the following sentence de dicto necessary or de re necessary? 
 
“The first Queen of England reigned over England.”It is de dicto necessary. If it expresses a proposition at all (i.e. if there is a first Queen of England to refer to) then it must express a true proposition (because the Queen of England, by definition, reigns over England.) 

Suppose Boudicca was the first Queen of England. Then “The first Queen of England reigned over England.” expresses the situation in which Boudicca reigned over England.  

Was this a situation that could not have been otherwise? 

It is a situation that could have been otherwise. Boudicca might not have been queen, had things gone differently. 

Consequently, the statement “The first Queen of England reigned over England”, is not de re necessary. That’s because it fails to express __________ true proposition.  It fails to express necessarily true proposition. It describes a situation that could be otherwise. 

Suppose Descartes says the following to himself: 

“2 plus 2 equals 4.” 

What should we say about this utterance? 

(a) The utterance is necessarily true de dicto? 
(b) The utterance is necessarily true de re?
(c) Both. 

Both. 

The sentence necessarily expresses a truth. I.e. whenever you say it, it is guaranteed to come out true. 

It also expresses a necessary truth. There is no way for 2 and 2 to sum to anything other than 4. 

In every possible world the sentence “all doctors that specialize in ophthalmology are doctors” expresses a truth. Even in worlds where there are no such doctors, it is true that all zero of the doctors that specialize in ophthalmology are doctors. 

However, it does not express a necessary state of affairs. The state of affairs expressed by “all doctors who specialize in ophthalmology are doctors” is the same state of affairs expressed by “Jones is a doctor AND Prabhu is a doctor AND ...” where every person mentioned is a doctor who specializes in ophthalmology, and where all such specialists are listed. 

But that is not a necessary state of affairs, since any one of those doctors might not have been a doctor at all. 

With this in mind, suppose Descartes believes the following: 

“All bachelors are unmarried.”

What should we say about this belief? 

(a) The belief is necessarily true de dicto? 
(b) The belief is necessarily true de re?We must say that the belief is necessarily true de dicto. 

That’s because it __________ expresses a(n) ___________ true proposition. 

Complete the sentence above by either inserting the word “necessarily” or by leaving it blank. That’s because it necessarily expresses a ___________ true proposition.

In every world that sentence expresses a truth, since in every world the set of bachelors contains only unmarried men. However, it does not express a necessarily true proposition, since the proposition expressed by ‘All bachelors are unmarried” is the same proposition expressed by “Jones is unmarried AND Smith is unmarried AND...” where every bachelor is mentioned. 

But that proposition expresses no necessary truth, since any one of those people could have been married, had things gone differently. 

What should we say about the following sentence?  

“All lawyers practice law.”

(a) The belief is necessarily true de dicto? 
(b) The belief is necessarily true de re?We must say that the belief is necessarily true de dicto. 

That’s because it __________ expresses a(n) _________ true proposition. 

Complete the sentence above by either inserting the word “necessarily” or by leaving it blank. That’s because it necessarily expresses a true proposition.

Which of the following is true? 

(a) Propositions that are necessarily true are sometimes necessarily true de re, and sometimes necessarily true de dicto.
(b) Sentences that are necessarily true are sometimes necessarily true de re, and sometimes necessarily true de dicto.



The answer is (b). It is sentences that are are necessarily true de dicto and de re. A sentence is necessarily true de dicto if it necessarily expresses a true proposition, and necessarily true de re iff it expresses a necessarily true proposition. 

If a proposition is necessarily true, it is just necessarily true period, not necessarily true de re or de dicto. 





From now in, we will adopt the convention of regarding the meaning of a sentence as being essential to it. In other words, any sentence with a different meaning thereby counts as a different sentence. 

This gives us a rule: 

Rule: If A and B are sentences, but A and B have different meanings, then A and B are not the same sentence no matter how similar they may look. 

For example, take the following two sentences: 

“He swerved three times before finally crashing into the bank.” <said about a getaway driver after a raid on the Chase Manhattan> 

“He swerved three times before finally crashing into the bank.” <said about a drunk driving a speedboat>. 

In the first case “bank” is being used to refer to a financial institution. In the second case, “bank” is being used to refer to the edge of a river. 

Hence, the two sentences have different meanings. That means that they are different _________, according to our rule above. 

Question: Can a sentence ever refer to things other than what it actually refers to, consistent with our rule?

Yes. It can refer to different things, but it cannot have a different meaning. 

For example, consider the sentence: 

“The President of the USA in 2009 was Barack Obama.” 

There are worlds where this sentence is true (like the actual world) and there are worlds where this sentence is false (worlds where Obama was not elected at all, or not elected during that period). 

Imagine, for example, that Obama had lost the 2008 election and his opponent John McCain had won. Then the phrase “the President of the USA in 2009” would have the same meaning, but it would refer to John McCain. Hence it would have a different referent. 

Is there a possible world where the sentence “The President is spending the day relaxing at his ranch” is not about the actual President, but is about someone else? Yes. That sentence could be about someone else in some possible world where someone else is the president. 

Could the sentence 

“The President is spending the day relaxing at his ranch.”

…be about bacon, in some other possible world? No. That sentence could not be about bacon without changing its meaning. But if it changed its meaning, it would not be the same sentence.   

Could the sentence: 

“The Queen of England is charming”

…be about pop star Lady Gaga in some other possible world? Yes. There is a possible world where history goes differently and Lady Gaga becomes the Queen of England, where that sentence would be about her. The sentence would not have to change its meaning to be about Lady Gaga. Only the facts in the world would have to change. 

Is there a possible world where the sentence

“The Queen of England is charming”

…is about sewage drainage systems in rural France? 

No. That sentence, according to our rule, cannot be about sewage draining systems, since that would require it to have a different meaning, and the same sentence cannot have different meanings. Sentences have their meanings essentially. 

We can now see one way for a sentence to contingently express a truth. A sentence contingently expresses a truth if (1) it expresses a true proposition in the actual world, but (2) it expresses a different, false, proposition in some other possible world. 

For example, the sentence “The man elected President in 2008 was born in Hawaii” contingently expresses a truth. That’s because (1) it expresses a _____ in the actual world but (2) in other worlds, where the phrase “The man elected President in 2008” picks out someone else, it expresses a different, _____, proposition. For example, the sentence “The man elected President in 2008 was born in Hawaii” contingently expresses a truth. That’s because (1) it expresses a true proposition in the actual world but (2) in other worlds, where the phrase “The man elected President in 2008” picks out someone else, it expresses a different, false, proposition.

For example, in the world where a New York born prosecutor named Rudy Giuliani wins the 2008 election, the expression “The man elected President in 2008” picks out Giuliani. Consequently, the sentence “The man elected President in 2008 was born in Hawaii”, in that world, would express the same proposition expressed by the sentence “____ ________ was born in Hawaii.” The sentence “The man elected President in 2008 was born in Hawaii” would, in that world, express the same proposition as the sentence “Rudy Giuliani was born in Hawaii.” 

So in the alternative world, the same sentence expresses an entirely different proposition. Moreover, the proposition is false in that universe.

Hence the sentence expresses a true proposition in this world, but it expresses a different, false, proposition in some other. 

Hence it c_______ expresses a true proposition.


Hence it contingently expresses a true proposition. 

We could make the same distinction with “necessarily”. In that case we would distinguish between: 

1*. Sentences that express necessarily true propositions. 

and

2*. Sentences that necessarily (or essentially) express true propositions.

1* concerns sentences that express a proposition that is true in every world. 2* concerns sentences that express, in every world in which the sentence exists, a true proposition (but not necessarily the same one). We have already had some experience with a similar distinction. Remember when we noted that the utterance “I exist” is guaranteed to express a truth, but does not express a necessary truth? Well, that’s the difference between: 

1**. The utterance “I exist” expresses a necessarily true proposition. (wrong) 

versus

2**. The utterance “I exist” essentially expresses a true proposition.

2** is correct because, whenever someone says “I exist”, they are guaranteed to say something true. But it is only contingently true, since no person had to exist! 




